GE.25-20490 (E) 120126 130126
Human Rights Council
Sixty-first session
23 February–2 April 2026
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*, **
Bulgaria
* Agreement was reached to publish the present document after the standard publication date owing to
circumstances beyond the submitter’s control.
** The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/61/11
General Assembly Distr.: General
13 January 2026
Original: English
A/HRC/61/11
2 GE.25-20490
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its fiftieth session from 3 to 14 November 2025.
The review of Bulgaria was held at the 8th meeting, on 6 November 2025. The delegation of
Bulgaria was headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Georg Georgiev. At its
15th meeting, held on 14 November 2025, the Working Group adopted the report on
Bulgaria.
2. On 8 January 2025, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Bulgaria: France, Kuwait and Mexico.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1
and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Bulgaria:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, on behalf of
the members of the core group of sponsors of the resolutions on the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment (Costa Rica, Maldives and Slovenia), Germany,
Liechtenstein, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland was transmitted to Bulgaria through the troika. These questions are
available on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Bulgaria stated that, since its previous review under the universal
periodic review mechanism, in 2020, and despite global challenges, Bulgaria had remained
actively engaged with international human rights mechanisms, submitting timely reports to
United Nations treaty bodies, extending standing invitations to special procedures and
serving on the Human Rights Council twice.
6. Following its third review, Bulgaria had received 233 recommendations. It had
accepted 193 and noted 24; 16 had been accepted only partially, owing to their political
nature. In 2022, it had adopted an action plan to implement those recommendations, overseen
by the National Coordination Mechanism on Human Rights.
7. In the area of rule of law, institutional and normative reforms carried out in 2023 had
enhanced accountability and the effectiveness of criminal investigations. An act to counter
corruption had been adopted and an independent commission for countering corruption had
been established, alongside legal improvements for whistle-blower protection and corporate
liability.
8. The two national human rights institutions had been strengthened with new leadership
and increased budgets. The office of the Ombudsman had retained its A accreditation status.
9. Bulgaria had continued to combat discrimination and intolerance, with Criminal Code
amendments, adopted in 2023, introducing harsher penalties for hate crimes, including those
1 A/HRC/WG.6/50/BGR/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/50/BGR/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/50/BGR/3.
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 3
based on sexual orientation. The 2021 national census had demonstrated the right of citizens
to freely self-identify.
10. The country’s secular framework upheld religious freedom, with over 230 religious
institutions registered over the past 20 years.
11. Bulgaria had supported media freedom and journalist safety through legal reforms,
including through a recent revision of legislation in the area of insult and defamation,
undertaken to curb strategic litigation against public participation.
12. In the area of gender equality, Bulgaria had registered an employment gap below the
European Union level, with women holding leadership roles across sectors. Bulgaria ranked
highly for female representation in diplomacy and information technology and had
implemented a national action plan to integrate the principles of the women and peace and
security agenda in its national policies.
13. Bulgaria had established a national council for the prevention of and protection from
domestic violence and had developed a national programme (2024–2026) in the same area.
Legal aid was State funded, and a mobile application, entitled “Help Me”, provided
information on victim assistance.
14. Regarding child rights, Bulgaria was actively engaged with the preparation of a new
optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the right to free pre-primary
and secondary education and was implementing the national strategy (to 2030) for child and
adolescent health. Anti-violence programmes included the national programme (to 2026) for
the prevention of violence and abuse of children and the CyberKidz Patrol application for
reporting abuse.
15. Bulgaria had adopted a national strategy for active ageing aimed at creating conditions
for an active and dignified life for older people.
16. Bulgaria was also implementing a national strategy for persons with disabilities
(2021–2030) and a national strategy for long-term care aimed at older persons and persons
with disabilities. Bulgaria had advanced its deinstitutionalization process, with most homes
– especially for children with disabilities – having been closed, and homes for older persons
having been reformed. The Bulgarian Sign Language Act had been adopted, and a national
mental health strategy was in place, focused on youth.
17. Roma inclusion remained a priority, with the national strategy for equality, inclusion
and participation of Roma providing for funds to support programmes in education, culture,
housing, employment and social protection.
18. As a European Union border State, Bulgaria upheld international obligations to
protect refugees and migrants. It had hosted 3 million Ukrainian refugees since 2022, and
was currently providing temporary protection to 73,000. In addition, it had financially
supported the comprehensive refugee response framework in Afghanistan. Bulgaria had
withdrawn its reservation to article 31 of the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons, on expulsion, and had included stateless persons in its most recent census.
19. In response to questions on the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment,
the delegation stated that Bulgaria had invested in renewable energy, waste management and
clean transport. It had increased administrative capacity and funding to guarantee
high-quality drinking water supply. A total of 97.9 per cent of bathing waters were rated as
excellent.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
20. During the interactive dialogue, 88 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
21. France welcomed the adoption of the programme for the prevention of domestic
violence and the protection of victims.
A/HRC/61/11
4 GE.25-20490
22. The Gambia welcomed efforts to strengthen anti-discrimination protections, equality
and social inclusion.
23. Georgia commended Bulgaria for progress in addressing domestic violence and
corruption, and in judicial independence.
24. Germany welcomed legislative steps against domestic violence, but remained
concerned about Roma registration issues and violence against women and girls.
25. Ghana noted the adoption of an anti-corruption law and commended Bulgaria for its
poverty reduction efforts.
26. Greece welcomed the adoption of the national programme to prevent and address
domestic violence.
27. Iceland made recommendations.
28. India welcomed the anti-corruption act and amendments to the Criminal Code
addressing racist and homophobic motives.
29. The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed concern about discrimination against Roma
communities and challenges faced by migrants.
30. Iraq expressed appreciation for the continued engagement by Bulgaria with the
universal periodic review mechanism.
31. Ireland welcomed actions to eliminate discrimination and encouraged Bulgaria to
continue combating gender-based violence.
32. Italy welcomed the State’s commitment to implementing the national programme for
the prevention of and protection from domestic violence.
33. Japan commended Bulgaria for its efforts to adopt the anti-corruption act and to
launch the anti-corruption commission.
34. Jordan welcomed reforms to strengthen the legislative and institutional human rights
framework.
35. Kuwait commended Bulgaria for the efforts made to strengthen the institutional
framework for the protection of human rights.
36. Lebanon commended Bulgaria for progress in judicial reform, the fight against
corruption and the promotion of equality.
37. Liechtenstein made recommendations.
38. Luxembourg made recommendations.
39. Malaysia welcomed various initiatives aimed at promoting and protecting human
rights since the previous universal periodic review cycle.
40. Maldives commended the adoption of the National Health Strategy.
41. Malta welcomed amendments to the Criminal Code and the protection against
domestic violence act.
42. Mexico commended Bulgaria for the adoption of the national action plan for the
promotion of equality between women and men.
43. Mongolia commended Bulgaria for efforts to improve gender equality, protect
children’s rights and promote judicial reform.
44. Montenegro welcomed measures to promote gender equality and address
discrimination.
45. Morocco commended Bulgaria for reforms aligning national legislation with
international obligations.
46. Nepal took note of the progress towards promoting gender equality and human rights
education.
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 5
47. The Kingdom of the Netherlands commended Bulgaria for the amendments to the law
on protection from domestic violence.
48. Nigeria noted steps taken to combat trafficking in persons and measures to improve
protection and assistance for victims.
49. North Macedonia noted the progress made in the areas of poverty reduction and social
housing.
50. Norway expressed concern about the weak judicial independence and insufficient
protection for Roma and LGBT+ persons.
51. Paraguay welcomed the national programme for the prevention of and protection
against domestic violence.
52. The Philippines welcomed expanded social assistance and targeted care programmes
for marginalized and at-risk children.
53. Poland welcomed the strengthening of the juvenile justice system and the adoption of
the national strategy for children.
54. Portugal commended Bulgaria for the adoption of the programme to strengthen
support for the mental health and physical well-being of preschool children.
55. Qatar commended Bulgaria for its efforts to strengthen the institutional framework for
human rights and combat corruption.
56. The Republic of Korea commended Bulgaria for its active engagement with the
United Nations human rights bodies.
57. The Republic of Moldova welcomed the achievements in the process of the
deinstitutionalization of childcare, a process that is nearing completion.
58. Romania welcomed the efforts made by Bulgaria to combat hate speech and hate
crime.
59. The delegation of Bulgaria stated that, in the areas of justice administration and anti-
corruption efforts, amendments to the judiciary act in 2023 had enhanced the role of the
Inspectorate of the Supreme Judicial Council, ensuring oversight without compromising
judicial independence. Draft amendments to the judiciary act were under way, aimed at
improving judicial transparency and efficiency. In 2025, the act on the protection of persons
who reported or publicly disclosed information on breaches had been amended to comply
with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and European Union
directives, extending safeguards across public and private sectors. Work was ongoing to
transpose the European Union directive on addressing strategic litigation against public
participation into national law. Penalties for defamation and insult had been reduced while
criminal legislation had been tightened against hate speech, racist crime and violence based
on sexual orientation.
60. The Supreme Court of Cassation maintained an electronic register of proceedings
against journalists and media outlets, thereby enhancing transparency and enabling the
monitoring of cases involving strategic litigation against public participation.
61. The protection against domestic violence act had been amended, to provide for the
establishment of a national council for the prevention of and protection from domestic
violence and an accompanying mechanism for coordination among the competent authorities.
Legal aid funding for domestic violence cases had been increased and regional victim-support
centres had been opened.
62. The rights of older persons had been prioritized through the criminalization of
unlicensed care homes and the strengthening of property protections.
63. Prison reforms had included building the first compliant facility in 18 years, thereby
reducing overcrowding and increasing rehabilitation opportunities.
64. Amendments made to the Administrative Procedure Code in 2025 and the
introduction of mandatory digitalization and electronic summonses had accelerated the
administration of justice.
A/HRC/61/11
6 GE.25-20490
65. Migration management had focused on enhanced resources, cooperation with the
European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) and neighbouring States, and the
dismantling of smuggling networks, which had led to a reduction of migration pressure.
Migrants enjoyed access to legal aid, medical care and cultural activities. Appropriate
protection measures were taken for unaccompanied children. Detention of irregular migrants
was limited to 24 hours and access to the asylum procedure was facilitated.
66. Police training and the adaptation of police reception facilities had improved
coordination and dialogue with the Roma community.
67. Support for action to address domestic violence had included specialized police units,
an automated information system with an algorithm for risk assessment, and targeted training.
68. Police capacity to combat cybercrime and online abuse, including hate speech, had
been enhanced with a new directorate. In addition, programmes had been established to
engage youth on issues such as trafficking, cybersecurity and tolerance, through school
meetings.
69. Bulgaria remained committed to promoting gender equality, including through the
equality act and a national strategy (2021–2030) for addressing pay gaps and stereotypes.
70. Reforms aimed at the deinstitutionalization of care for children had resulted in the
closure of 135 of 137 institutions, shifting toward family- and community-based care. The
reform was also supported by the implementation of the European Child Guarantee.
71. To address the challenge of an aging population, Bulgaria had adopted a national
strategy for active aging (2019–2030) and had significantly increased the budget for the care
system.
72. Active labour market policy prioritized vulnerable groups, including Roma and
persons with disabilities, supported by labour mediators, and a wide range of employment
services. Social services provided free shelters, counselling and rehabilitation services for
victims of domestic violence, while campaigns targeted early child marriage and trafficking.
73. The Russian Federation noted the high level of unemployment among Roma and the
operation of neo-Nazi organizations promoting racial hatred.
74. Samoa noted efforts to prepare draft amendments to the Criminal Code to align it with
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
75. Serbia commended Bulgaria for the adoption of legal instruments for victim
protection, enhancing prevention of and the response to domestic violence.
76. Sierra Leone welcomed the recognition of the right to early childhood education and
efforts to advance the right to education.
77. Slovakia welcomed the efforts to continue with judicial and institutional reforms.
78. Slovenia commended Bulgaria for the adoption of the national programme on the
prevention of and protection from domestic violence.
79. Spain commended Bulgaria for the adoption of the national programme for the
prevention of and protection against domestic violence.
80. Switzerland made recommendations.
81. Tajikistan welcomed the national report of Bulgaria as a demonstration of the
country’s readiness to engage and its progress in human rights.
82. Thailand welcomed advances on the rights of Roma and other ethnic groups.
83. Togo welcomed the ratification of two International Labour Organization
conventions, No. 155 and No. 187, on occupational safety and health.
84. Tunisia welcomed the contribution made by Bulgaria to development and
humanitarian assistance.
85. Türkiye commended Bulgaria for its efforts in combating Islamophobia and
xenophobia and protecting mosques and other religious sites.
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 7
86. Ukraine noted efforts to combat hate speech, gender-based violence and corruption.
87. The United Arab Emirates expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Bulgaria on
climate change mitigation.
88. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about
the introduction of a ban over so-called “LGBT+ propaganda” in the school curriculum.
89. Uruguay welcomed the efforts made to implement recommendations from the third
universal periodic review cycle.
90. Uzbekistan praised Bulgaria for its constructive engagement with the United Nations
human rights mechanisms.
91. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted with concern reports of excessive use of
force against Roma.
92. Viet Nam praised Bulgaria for progress in legislative reforms and the promotion of
gender equality.
93. Albania noted the challenges faced regarding the protection of women and girls from
violence and the integration of the Roma community.
94. Algeria commended Bulgaria for the adoption of comprehensive legislation on the
prevention of domestic violence.
95. Armenia commended Bulgaria for its policy on equal rights and opportunities for
women and girls.
96. Australia encouraged Bulgaria to enforce penalties for employers who deny job access
to persons with disabilities.
97. Austria expressed concern about the persistence of gender-based and domestic
violence and challenges for the Roma community.
98. Azerbaijan welcomed the increase in social aid payments and the measures to support
disadvantaged children.
99. Bahrain commended Bulgaria for the progress made in protecting and promoting
human rights.
100. Belgium stressed the need to do more in the areas of gender-based violence, sexual
orientation and gender identity.
101. Brazil expressed appreciation for the recent adoption of the new anti-corruption law
and the amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code.
102. The delegation of Bulgaria noted that inclusive education remained a top priority.
Measures to reduce absenteeism and dropout rates had been adopted, reintegrating over
14,000 students in 2025. Support had included free preschool since 2022, increased
educational mediators and tailored language assistance for non-Bulgarian speakers. Children
with special educational needs received individualized support, and new tools aided those
with learning difficulties.
103. The country’s asylum policies were aligned with European Union and national laws
and international instruments, notably the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
the Protocol thereto. The country ensured fair asylum procedures with access to education,
healthcare and employment. Vulnerable groups, especially unaccompanied and separated
minors, received tailored support in safe zones offering family-like environments.
104. In the area of trafficking in persons, legal reforms included extending the statute of
limitations for child sexual offences and trafficking, and enhanced judicial response for, early
identification and referral of, and assistance for, victims. These initiatives were coordinated
by the National Commission for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings and other
networks, and were focused on vulnerable groups. Specialized services for trafficking victims
included safe housing, medical and psychological care, legal aid and reintegration support.
105. The Roma strategy for 2021–2030 promoted inclusion through increased mediators in
health, education and employment. As a result, over 17,000 Roma had gained employment
A/HRC/61/11
8 GE.25-20490
in 2024. Amendments to the Civil Registration Act in 2024 allowed for the issuance of
identification and access to social housing and other benefits. The national Roma strategy
included measures on early marriage prevention and Roma women’s empowerment.
106. Brunei Darussalam recognized the efforts made in poverty eradication and inclusive
education.
107. Burkina Faso congratulated Bulgaria for providing free hospital care to 3,251 people
without health insurance.
108. Cameroon welcomed judicial reform, the fight against corruption and the promotion
of equality between women and men.
109. Canada praised Bulgaria for the measures taken to combat violence against women
and girls.
110. Chile congratulated Bulgaria for progress under its national strategy for child
deinstitutionalization.
111. China commended Bulgaria for progress in combating hate speech, domestic violence
and corruption, and in safeguarding the rights of women, children and persons with
disabilities.
112. Colombia congratulated the national human rights institution on its accreditation with
A status.
113. Costa Rica welcomed the inclusion of racist, xenophobic and homophobic motives as
aggravating circumstances in criminal offences.
114. Croatia encouraged Bulgaria to further strengthen the legislative and policy
framework to combat domestic violence.
115. Cuba urged Bulgaria to ensure that recent legal reforms were applied transparently
and effectively, in line with international standards.
116. Cyprus commended Bulgaria for amending the Criminal Code to align the definition
of torture with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment.
117. Czechia commended Bulgaria for recent legislative advances in the fight against hate
speech and hate crime.
118. Denmark commended Bulgaria for new legal frameworks targeting high-level
corruption and encouraged their effective implementation.
119. The Dominican Republic recognized the efforts made by Bulgaria in education and
child protection.
120. Egypt encouraged Bulgaria to continue action against trafficking in persons through
legislation.
121. El Salvador recognized measures adopted to strengthen the response to domestic
violence.
122. Estonia welcomed the significant legal and legislative measures taken to strengthen
human rights protection.
123. Ethiopia commended Bulgaria for its Mid-Term Programme for Development
Assistance and Humanitarian Aid (2020–2024).
124. Finland commended Bulgaria for the action plan for, and voluntary interim reporting
on, the implementation of accepted universal periodic review recommendations.
125. Indonesia welcomed the 2023 Anti-Corruption Act aimed at enhancing legal measures
to prevent and combat corruption.
126. Pakistan welcomed efforts to strengthen the capacity of national human rights
institutions and to address hate speech.
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 9
127. In its closing remarks, the delegation of Bulgaria made two factual clarifications
regarding the criminalization of torture in 2023 and the establishment of a registry of media
ownership. It considered that those two recommendations had been addressed. The
delegation noted that Bulgaria would examine the recommendations closely, as many of them
could contribute to the national efforts to develop and implement human rights policies. It
also reiterated the commitment of Bulgaria to the promotion and protection of human rights.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
128. The following recommendations will be examined by Bulgaria, which will
provide responses in due time, but no later than the sixty-first session of the Human
Rights Council:
128.1 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Togo);
128.2 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ghana);
128.3 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Nigeria);
128.4 Take steps to accede to the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
(Indonesia);
128.5 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (Morocco);
128.6 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and
strengthen protection and integration measures for migrants, refugees and
asylum-seekers (Gambia);
128.7 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance (Paraguay);
128.8 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Chile) (Malta);
128.9 Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Republic of Korea);
128.10 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal);
128.11 Expedite the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Dominican Republic);
128.12 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Cyprus);
128.13 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (Malta);
128.14 Accelerate the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and continue strengthening
community-based support services for persons with disabilities (Viet Nam);
128.15 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia);
A/HRC/61/11
10 GE.25-20490
128.16 Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure (Estonia);
128.17 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Switzerland);
128.18 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Croatia);
128.19 Consider ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence
(Istanbul Convention) (Ukraine);
128.20 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) and align national legislation with international standards in
combating violence against women (Togo);
128.21 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) as a sign of commitment to the fight against violence against women
and domestic violence (Spain);
128.22 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, and ensure its full
implementation in its domestic legal system (Dominican Republic);
128.23 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) and strengthen efforts to combat domestic violence (Norway);
128.24 Ratify the Istanbul Convention and provide adequate resources to the
national programme against domestic violence (Italy);
128.25 Strengthen the fight against gender-based domestic violence and ratify
the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) (Luxembourg);
128.26 Ratify and fully implement the Council of Europe Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence
(Istanbul Convention), amend the Criminal Code to criminalize marital rape and
adopt a consent-based definition of rape (Belgium);
128.27 Intensify efforts to combat gender-based violence, namely by ratifying
and implementing the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Portugal);
128.28 Continue efforts in combating domestic violence against women and
children and consider ratifying the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing
and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Republic of Moldova);
128.29 Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute on the crime of
aggression (Liechtenstein);
128.30 Maintain active participation in international and regional human
rights mechanisms and continue close cooperation with relevant United Nations
bodies (Tajikistan);
128.31 Undertake the necessary constitutional amendments to complete the
process of ratifying the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Austria);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 11
128.32 Expedite the harmonization of national legislation with the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and advance
towards ratification of the Istanbul Convention (Montenegro);
128.33 Adopt a comprehensive definition of torture in line with the standards
of the Convention against Torture (Gambia);
128.34 Adopt a definition of torture in line with the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and
ensure that torture is defined as a specific crime (Colombia);
128.35 Criminalize torture as a specific offence in national legislation, in
accordance with the standards of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Chile);
128.36 Enhance the implementation of legislation in line with the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, including the
protection against domestic violence act (Thailand);
128.37 Fully incorporate the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography into national legislation, criminalizing all related forms of
exploitation (Montenegro);
128.38 Amend legislation to criminalize all forms of gender-based violence
and expedite ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention) (Iceland);
128.39 Continue efforts to combat hate speech and hate crimes (Uruguay);
128.40 Take further steps towards strengthening national human rights
institutions in line with the principles relating to the status of national institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) for the
effective implementation of human rights obligations, especially in favour of
women and children (Iraq);
128.41 Redouble efforts to ensure that the Ombudsman institution, as a
national preventive mechanism, has sufficient budget and staff to faithfully
perform its mandate for the protection of minorities and vulnerable groups
(Republic of Korea);
128.42 Provide sufficient resources to the Ombudsman institution to enable it
to carry out its mandate in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Chile);
128.43 Provide adequate financial and human resources to the council
established under the National Coordination Mechanism on Human Rights
(Morocco);
128.44 Strengthen the capacity of its council under the national coordination
mechanism for human rights and consider developing digital tools to aid the
council with its work on human rights (Samoa);
128.45 Strengthen its national mechanism for follow-up on human rights
recommendations, considering the possibility of receiving cooperation for this
purpose (Paraguay);
128.46 Strengthen measures to combat racism, xenophobia, hate speech and
racially motivated police violence, including through public awareness
campaigns and effective sanctions for discriminatory conduct (Gambia);
128.47 Adopt the necessary and pertinent measures for the eradication of all
forms of racial discrimination, xenophobia and other related forms of
intolerance present in the country (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
128.48 Take measures to combat racism, antisemitism, xenophobia and other
forms of discrimination based on religion or nationality (Russian Federation);
A/HRC/61/11
12 GE.25-20490
128.49 Intensify efforts to combat racial and ethnic discrimination (Nigeria);
128.50 Advance reforms to the Criminal Code to ensure that offences
motivated by racism and xenophobia are criminalized as separate offences
distinct from vandalism and that penalties commensurate to the seriousness of
those crimes are imposed (Colombia);
128.51 Continue to adopt effective measures to combat racist hate speech and
to prevent it from reaching the media and the Internet (Iraq);
128.52 Further strengthen measures to eliminate hate speech, including in the
media and on the Internet (Republic of Moldova);
128.53 Strengthen national efforts to combat hate speech and discrimination
by expanding awareness programmes and capacity-building for law enforcement
agencies to ensure equal protection for all segments of society (Kuwait);
128.54 Take effective measures to ensure that incitement to hatred,
discrimination and hate speech are prosecuted (Costa Rica);
128.55 Further strengthen measures to combat hate speech and intolerance,
including online, and ensure effective enforcement of related legislation
(Algeria);
128.56 Redouble efforts to prevent and combat racial discrimination,
including against the Roma population (Paraguay);
128.57 Enact a comprehensive anti-discrimination law explicitly recognizing
anti-Gypsyism, and adopt effective measures to combat racist hate speech,
including in the media and on the Internet (Croatia);
128.58 Raise awareness and build the capacity of law enforcement and
criminal justice officials to further address hate crime (Czechia);
128.59 Continue efforts to combat hate crimes and violence based on racial,
religious or sex-based grounds, ensure effective investigation and accountability,
and provide adequate protection and support to victims (Egypt);
128.60 Continue advancing gender equality, including by ensuring equal
representation of women in political and public life (Mongolia);
128.61 Continue to promote gender equality by facilitating women’s access to
employment, decision-making positions and economic empowerment
(Cameroon);
128.62 Take effective measures to further eliminate discrimination against
women, continue to combat crimes such as trafficking in persons and safeguard
the rights of women and children (China);
128.63 Intensify further efforts to promote equality between women and men,
including through the implementation of the national strategy for the years
2021–2030 (Azerbaijan);
128.64 Take additional steps to reduce the gender pay gap and promote equal
pay for equal work between men and women (Nigeria);
128.65 Further strengthen the protection of persons belonging to vulnerable
or marginalized groups, especially Roma, women, and persons with disabilities,
through appropriate social and economic measures that counter social inequality
and combat poverty (Romania);
128.66 Continue strengthening efforts to promote social inclusion and equal
opportunities for all, particularly for vulnerable groups (Uzbekistan);
128.67 Further strengthen the gender equality framework with adequate
resources and coordination (Ukraine);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 13
128.68 Establish a mechanism that promotes gender equality, ensure
adequate allocation of resources and improve ways to assess their impact
(Serbia);
128.69 Implement specific measures to achieve substantive equality for
women and girls at all stages of life who face intersectional forms of
discrimination, such as women and girls with disabilities, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender women, and intersex people (Colombia);
128.70 Adopt and implement legislative measures to ensure non-
discrimination against Roma people with a gender perspective (Spain);
128.71 Adopt effective national policies that protect the Roma population
from structural discrimination and hate crime (Cuba);
128.72 Strengthen the implementation of the national action plan for equality,
inclusion and participation of the Roma population (El Salvador);
128.73 Guarantee non-discrimination towards the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community by eliminating the amendments introduced
to the preschool and school education law which prevent inclusive education
(Spain);
128.74 Amend the regulations that prohibit the dissemination or promotion
of ideas related to diverse sexual orientations or gender identities, in order to
guarantee freedom of expression, equality and non-discrimination for LGBTIQ+
persons (Chile);
128.75 Initiate transparent, competitive and fair procedures to appoint new
members to the high judicial bodies whose terms have expired (Canada);
128.76 Implement transparent and fair procedures to appoint new members
to public bodies (Australia);
128.77 Ensure a transparent and merit-based process for selecting and
appointing members to public bodies, especially in key judicial institutions such
as the Supreme Judicial Council, its inspectorate and the State prosecution
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
128.78 Strengthen measures to combat political corruption, including
ensuring the proper functioning of the anti-corruption commission
(Luxembourg);
128.79 Allocate sufficient resources to implement the national strategy for the
prevention and counteraction of corruption (Morocco);
128.80 Ensure that future amendments to the Law on Non-Profit Legal
Entities provide greater transparency and equal access for non-governmental
organizations to participate in political and public life (Denmark);
128.81 Amend the law on the judiciary to clearly define ethical standards and
disciplinary grounds for prosecutors and investigators, ensuring legal clarity and
predictability (Czechia);
128.82 Carry out the implementation of necessary reforms with a view to
establishing an effective accountability mechanism for the office of the
Prosecutor General, based on the recommendations of the European
Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) (Finland);
128.83 Investigate cases of racially motivated crimes and bring those
responsible to justice (Russian Federation);
128.84 Promote judicial independence by ensuring that the appropriate
judicial proceedings are implemented (Japan);
128.85 Continue to implement judicial reforms and ensure accountability and
transparency, in line with relevant international standards (Kuwait);
A/HRC/61/11
14 GE.25-20490
128.86 Continue institutional and judicial reform efforts to further strengthen
the independence of the judiciary and improve mechanisms of accountability and
transparency (Egypt);
128.87 Continue judicial reform, in accordance with targets 16.3 and 16.6 of
the Sustainable Development Goals and in line with the recommendations of the
Venice Commission, by ensuring the independence of judges and prosecutors
and by establishing effective oversight mechanisms (Switzerland);
128.88 Continue strengthening the independence of the judicial system by
guaranteeing transparency and accountability in its operation (Cameroon);
128.89 Implement legislative measures to ensure judicial independence and
prevent political interference (Norway);
128.90 Align the definitions of rape and sexual violence in the Criminal Code
with international human rights law and enhance access to justice mechanisms
for victims and survivors (Philippines);
128.91 Further strengthen the impartiality and independence of law
enforcement, the judiciary, the Prosecutor General’s office and the anti-
corruption commission, ensuring transparency and accountability in line with
European standards and values (Kingdom of the Netherlands);
128.92 Strengthen efforts to reform the juvenile justice system in line with
international standards and the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(Maldives);
128.93 Investigate and punish those responsible for cases of child and organ
trafficking (Burkina Faso);
128.94 Intensify efforts to bring detention conditions into line with
international standards (Russian Federation);
128.95 Take effective steps to enforce criminal provisions against hate crime
and hate speech by ensuring that such crimes are reported, investigated,
prosecuted and punished with appropriate sanctions, and that victims receive
full reparation (Malta);
128.96 Expand training and capacity-building programmes within justice and
public administration institutions to promote the values of integrity and good
governance, and to ensure the effective implementation of legislation related to
human rights (Jordan);
128.97 Strengthen support for journalists, by transposing the European
Union directive against strategic lawsuits against public participation (France);
128.98 Enhance media transparency through mandatory disclosure of
ownership and funding and implement effective protection for journalists
(Kingdom of the Netherlands);
128.99 Improve transparency in media ownership (Czechia);
128.100 Strengthen legal safeguards to protect media freedom and the safety
of journalists (Australia);
128.101 Protect journalists and media workers against any form of harassment
or attack, promptly investigate such acts and bring those responsible to justice
(Austria);
128.102 Protect independent media from political and economic interference
and ensure transparent allocation of public funding (Norway);
128.103 Continue to take necessary measures, including legal amendments, to
uphold the freedom of expression of journalists (Republic of Korea);
128.104 Amend the Criminal Code to ensure better protection of journalists
(Ukraine);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 15
128.105 Amend the Criminal Code to explicitly prohibit targeted lawsuits
against journalists, establish clear criteria for dismissing cases early and
establishing a comprehensive fund for victims of strategic lawsuits against public
participation, and ensure effective implementation and follow-up (Finland);
128.106 Adopt and implement measures to ensure a safe, enabling and
non-discriminatory environment for independent and impartial journalists
(Sierra Leone);
128.107 Enhance efforts to address reports of growing advocacy of hatred
constituting incitement to discrimination and hostility both online and offline
(Pakistan);
128.108 Increase the measures and efforts to address persistence of the
phenomena of hate speech and hate crime, including in the media and on the
Internet (North Macedonia);
128.109 Consider fully decriminalizing defamation (North Macedonia);
128.110 Ensure that the principle of freedom of association, as provided for in
article 11 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms (European Convention on Human Rights), is respected
without any discrimination and applied in accordance with the relevant case law
of the European Court of Human Rights (North Macedonia);
128.111 Ensure full and effective compliance with the new guidelines for the
registration of associations by all stakeholders (Austria);
128.112 Investigate threats, attacks and acts of violence against journalists,
ensuring that all complaints are handled effectively, impartially and with due
process guarantees (Cuba);
128.113 Continue to safeguard freedom of the press and ensure the protection
of journalists against threats and violence (Indonesia);
128.114 Provide necessary training for law enforcement officials on the
protection and promotion of human rights (Egypt);
128.115 Criminalize marital rape and adopt a consent-based definition of rape
that applies to all persons without discrimination (Iceland);
128.116 Amend the Criminal Code to criminalize marital rape explicitly and to
ensure the definition of rape is fully in line with the international standards
(Ireland);
128.117 Amend the Criminal Code to criminalize marital rape as per the
recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (Cyprus);
128.118 Amend the Criminal Code to explicitly include marital rape (Czechia);
128.119 Reform the Criminal Code to replace existing definitions of rape and
other forms of sexual violence based on coercion with definitions based on
consent (Costa Rica);
128.120 Strengthen measures, including legal ones, to prevent child marriage,
particularly among Roma minors, in view of their full social integration (Italy);
128.121 Continue its efforts to combat trafficking in human beings and
enhance protection of victims (Georgia);
128.122 Adopt comprehensive measures to combat human trafficking and
protect victims (Islamic Republic of Iran);
128.123 Continue efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in persons, with
particular focus on victim identification and protection and labour exploitation
cases (Lebanon);
A/HRC/61/11
16 GE.25-20490
128.124 Further enhance the prevention, detection and prosecution of
trafficking in persons, and ensure adequate protection and support for victims
(Nigeria);
128.125 Intensify efforts to provide protection and support services for victims
of trafficking, including through the training of public officials (Uruguay);
128.126 Undertake further efforts to combat human trafficking, including by
allocating sufficient resources to the relevant national bodies (Republic of
Moldova);
128.127 Uphold its responsibility to prevent human trafficking by taking
preventive measures, protecting victims and increasing funding for shelters
(Austria);
128.128 Further strengthen its efforts to combat trafficking, particularly by
ensuring the early identification and referral of child trafficking victims
(Greece);
128.129 Effectively combat human trafficking, particularly of women and
children, and utilize international best practices in prevention, treatment and
redress (Bahrain);
128.130 Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat trafficking in persons
(Cyprus);
128.131 Increase financial institutional support for the Ombudsman’s child
rights office, to enable the full implementation of its mandate, especially in
preventing child trafficking and abuse (Serbia);
128.132 Strengthen the monitoring mechanism of Bulgaria’s Child Guarantee
National Action Plan for poverty reduction and promotion of social inclusion
(Malaysia);
128.133 Intensify efforts to reduce poverty and improve access to basic public
services for children and other vulnerable groups, including by expanding
targeted social assistance programmes and inclusive development initiatives
(Viet Nam);
128.134 Increase investment in public services such as education and health
care, place great emphasis on economic, social and cultural rights and
development rights, and eliminate inequalities (China);
128.135 Continue implementing the packages for newborns initiative, which is
part of the Food and Basic Material Assistance Programme (2021–2027) (El
Salvador);
128.136 Continue efforts to promote access to healthcare for all citizens and
ensure their coverage with health insurance (Tunisia);
128.137 Continue efforts to enhance the implementation of the National Health
Strategy 2030, ensuring improved access to healthcare for all, and reducing
infant and child mortality rates, particularly in rural areas (Qatar);
128.138 Continue promoting the National Health Strategy 2030, which
contributes to improving maternal and child health (El Salvador);
128.139 Continue increasing investment in the health sector, ensuring
equitable access to healthcare services, with particular emphasis on maternal
and child health, as well as mental health support (Ethiopia);
128.140 Allocate sufficient resources to implement the National Programme
for Improving Maternal and Child Health 2021–2030 (Croatia);
128.141 Allocate sufficient resources to implement the National Programme
for Improving Maternal and Child Health 2021–2030 (Estonia);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 17
128.142 Strengthen measures to enhance universal access to quality education
for all, particularly for migrants, persons with disabilities and women and girls
(Nepal);
128.143 Expand access to inclusive education and healthcare services,
especially for vulnerable groups, and those living in rural and remote areas
(Mongolia);
128.144 Improve sanitary conditions in psychiatric care facilities, and access to
quality individual psychological and medical care (Canada);
128.145 Improve living conditions and access to adequate healthcare in
State-run institutions, including prisons and closed psychiatric institutions
(Germany);
128.146 Strengthen the implementation of measures aimed at improving access
to quality education and reducing dropout rates among Roma children, children
with disabilities and other disadvantaged children (Philippines);
128.147 Continue and expand efforts to ensure the full realization of the right
to education, particularly for Roma children (Sierra Leone);
128.148 Continue efforts to promote the right to education for all children and
combat school dropout (Tunisia);
128.149 Continue efforts to promote and guarantee the right to education for
all (United Arab Emirates);
128.150 Improve access to education for Roma people, students from rural
areas and students with disabilities through the enhancement of school
infrastructure (Costa Rica);
128.151 Continue strengthening access to quality and inclusive education, with
a focus on children from minority groups, rural areas and other disadvantaged
communities (Ethiopia);
128.152 Further foster inclusive education programmes and enhance access to
vocational and technical training opportunities with a continued focus on
students from the Roma community (Pakistan);
128.153 Take additional measures to ensure a safe, violence-free school
environment (Qatar);
128.154 Continue developing programmes that contribute to ensuring a safe
and violence-free school environment, especially for at-risk groups (El
Salvador);
128.155 Further enhance human rights education and awareness-raising aimed
at fostering tolerance and mutual respect in society (Uzbekistan);
128.156 Promote further human rights education and awareness programmes,
particularly among youth and vulnerable groups (Tajikistan);
128.157 Take further measures to reduce school dropout rates (Cyprus);
128.158 Guarantee the right of asylum-seeking, refugee and migrant children
to education (Uruguay);
128.159 Repeal the law on amendments and supplements to the law on
preschool and school education, in line with Bulgaria’s obligations under
international human rights laws, including the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (Denmark);
128.160 Ensure that no impediments are created to the preservation,
expression and development of cultural identity by all citizens (North
Macedonia);
A/HRC/61/11
18 GE.25-20490
128.161 Strengthen climate change mitigation and adaptation measures,
especially in rural and remote areas and in communities that are most affected
or with local economies relying on climate (Samoa);
128.162 Adopt effective measures in environmental regulation to prevent
neighbourhoods, including Roma neighbourhoods, from being located near
environmentally hazardous areas (Costa Rica);
128.163 Continue active participation in international initiatives and
multilateral cooperation for the advancement of human rights and sustainable
development (Uzbekistan);
128.164 Intensify efforts to promote the rights of women and children and
ensure the provision of an adequate level of health and education, especially in
remote areas (Iraq);
128.165 Promote women’s participation in leadership, entrepreneurship and
science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields (Malaysia);
128.166 Further enhance the participation of women in political and public life,
including through temporary special measures such as statutory quotas and
gender parity systems in public administration and foreign service (Armenia);
128.167 Continue efforts to promote gender equality, particularly by
addressing remaining gaps in women’s economic participation and
representation in decision-making (Algeria);
128.168 Work to reduce the gender pay gap to ensure fair and favourable
working conditions (Bahrain);
128.169 Identify and eliminate obstacles limiting women’s access to justice,
ensuring a safe and accessible environment that prevents revictimization and
strengthening awareness of women’s rights and the training of justice operators
and law enforcement agencies (Paraguay);
128.170 Adopt a comprehensive consent-based legal definition of rape, in line
with international human rights laws and standards, including the Council of
Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) (Slovenia);
128.171 Redouble efforts to combat gender-based violence and promote gender
equality in all walks of life (Nepal);
128.172 Amend the law on protection against domestic violence to recognize all
forms of gender-based violence (Mexico);
128.173 Provide clarity in its penal code regarding the definition and scope of
sexual assault offences, including reducing the conditions required that
constitute a lack of consent (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland);
128.174 Adopt a consent-based definition of rape and ensure accountability for
all gender-based violence (Sierra Leone);
128.175 Continue the effective implementation of the 2023 national law on
protection against domestic violence (Albania);
128.176 Strengthen the fight against gender-based violence (Albania);
128.177 Improve measures and resources in the combating of domestic violence
and gender-based violence and where possible offer support and safe shelter to
survivors and families affected (Samoa);
128.178 Step up efforts to address sexual and domestic violence without undue
delays, including by providing necessary support services for victims
(Indonesia);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 19
128.179 Continue and enhance efforts to combat violence against women and
domestic violence by eliminating restrictive time limits on protection orders,
removing barriers to justice for women, and expanding support services for
victims (Romania);
128.180 Enhance protection mechanisms for victims of domestic violence,
ensuring adequate access to crisis accommodation shelters and psychological and
legal support (Lebanon);
128.181 Introduce appropriate measures and relevant mechanisms to better
protect victims of domestic violence, to assure swift and consistent institutional
response (Slovakia);
128.182 Continue its efforts by transposing the European Union directive of
14 May 2024 on combating violence against women and domestic violence
(France);
128.183 Ensure the effective implementation of the legal framework on
domestic and gender-based violence (Germany);
128.184 Take steps against domestic violence affecting women and girls
through legislative and law enforcement measures (India);
128.185 Strengthen prevention and awareness-raising initiatives to address
harmful gender stereotypes and attitudes that perpetuate gender-based violence
(Germany);
128.186 Continue working to combat all forms of violence and discrimination
against women and girls by strengthening the relevant institutional frameworks
and developing awareness-raising and social assistance programmes (United
Arab Emirates);
128.187 Intensify efforts to activate mechanisms for the protection of women
and girls from violence, ensuring the provision of legal and psychological support
to victims and strengthening avenues for redress (Jordan);
128.188 Strengthen actions to implement specific measures regarding
discrimination and gender-based violence, and to combat violence against
children (Uruguay);
128.189 Prevent, punish and eradicate gender-based violence (Cuba);
128.190 Take further measures to ensure women’s participation in political
and public life and decision-making positions and access to the judicial system
(Greece);
128.191 Criminalize obstetric violence and other forms of violence committed
during childbirth (Burkina Faso);
128.192 Strengthen its efforts to protect children’s rights by continuing the
implementation of the Child Guarantee National Action Plan for 2021–2030
(France);
128.193 Adopt the national children’s strategy, including an effective system of
relevant data collection (Italy);
128.194 Strengthen coordination among child protection, law enforcement,
healthcare, education and judicial sectors to combat violence against children
(Maldives);
128.195 Take further steps towards strengthening the capacity of the child
protection system (Georgia);
128.196 Allocate adequate resources and improve coordination for
strengthening the child protection system (Thailand);
A/HRC/61/11
20 GE.25-20490
128.197 Strengthen the capacity of the child protection system to end poverty,
especially among children with disabilities and Roma children, by amending the
Family Allowances Act to allow adequate social benefits (Poland);
128.198 Strengthen social protection policies aimed at eradicating child
poverty and exclusion, guaranteeing adequate benefits, a safe environment and
child-friendly justice (Paraguay);
128.199 Ensure that all unaccompanied minors are assigned a qualified legal
guardian, while strengthening care and reception arrangements within the
national child protection system, including access to safe, age-appropriate
accommodation (Belgium);
128.200 Continue to strengthen its child protection system with a view to
ensuring a safe and secure environment for every child (Brunei Darussalam);
128.201 Pursue the full implementation of existing child and adolescent health
and development frameworks, including early childhood development, violence
prevention and mental health services, strengthening outreach to children in
vulnerable situations (Lebanon);
128.202 Adopt urgent and structural measures to ensure the comprehensive
protection of migrant children, in accordance with international obligations
(Cuba);
128.203 Ensure that children, persons with disabilities and older persons enjoy
equality when it comes to living in a family environment, an adequate standard
of living and community inclusion and step up its commitment to
deinstitutionalization (Poland);
128.204 Continue expanding social protection programmes for the elderly,
persons with disabilities and families in need (Tajikistan);
128.205 Continue efforts to adopt a human rights-based approach for persons
with disabilities to ensure greater integration (Bahrain);
128.206 Continue efforts to adopt a human rights-based approach to disability
(Japan);
128.207 Continue its efforts to adopt a human rights-based approach to
disability and strengthen support for the social integration and individual
development of children with disabilities (Greece);
128.208 Apply a human rights-based approach to disability, strengthen early
detection and intervention services and ensure full enjoyment by children with
disabilities of their rights (Armenia);
128.209 Strengthen support for the social integration and individual
development of children with disabilities (Ghana);
128.210 Increase resources and training for students with disabilities and
provide career guidance to at-risk pupils (Malaysia);
128.211 Review the education system to eliminate any educational segregation
of students with disabilities and to encourage their access to inclusive education
in integrated classes (Poland);
128.212 Continue measures to ensure the protection and promotion of the
rights of persons with disabilities and foster their social inclusion (Azerbaijan);
128.213 Further enhance efforts to ensure the social inclusion of persons with
different abilities in all aspects of life (Brunei Darussalam);
128.214 Enhance efforts to ensure that persons with disabilities and mental
illness have full access to healthcare (Italy);
128.215 Strengthen the national strategy for equality, inclusion and
participation of Roma (2021–2030) to ensure its effective implementation to
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 21
address the existing challenges faced by Roma communities (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela);
128.216 Continue the effective implementation of the national strategy for
Roma equality, inclusion and participation (2021–2030) (Albania);
128.217 Implement the national strategy (2021–2030) for the equality, inclusion
and participation of Roma, notably by allocating sufficient resources for housing,
education and healthcare (Switzerland);
128.218 Protect Roma people from discrimination and strengthen legal
mechanisms for the prosecution of perpetrators of hate crimes (Luxembourg);
128.219 Ensure the effective implementation of the national strategy for
equality, inclusion and participation of Roma (2021–2030) (Ireland);
128.220 Intensify efforts to ensure the equal inclusion of Roma communities in
all aspects of public life, including the provision of adequate housing conditions
and the enforcement of anti-hate speech legislation (Germany);
128.221 Eliminate social and economic discrimination against Roma
communities, particularly in education and housing (Islamic Republic of Iran);
128.222 Safeguard and promote the fundamental right to education of Roma,
thus ensuring inclusive access to schools and effectively combating school
dropout, particularly in rural areas (Liechtenstein);
128.223 Undertake targeted interventions that address unique vulnerabilities
faced by marginalized communities such as the Roma community, in education,
housing and health (India);
128.224 Intensify efforts to safeguard the economic, social and cultural rights
of ethnic minorities, including the protection and promotion of the languages and
cultural heritage (Serbia);
128.225 Improve access to education, health, housing and employment for
Roma and other ethnic minorities through effective implementation of the
national strategy (Thailand);
128.226 Adopt legislation facilitating the removal of forcibly given Bulgarian
names from official records and for this legislation to expedite citizenship
renaturalization requests of Turks formerly holding Bulgarian citizenship
without requiring them to submit their forcedly used Bulgarian names, as
recommended during the second universal periodic review cycle (Türkiye);
128.227 Strengthen the fight against all forms of discrimination by adopting
inclusive policies and concrete actions in favour of minorities, particularly Roma
communities and people of immigrant origin (Cameroon);
128.228 Ensure cross-sectoral implementation of the national strategy for
equality, inclusion and participation of Roma by allocating funds, adopting
intersectional policies and supporting non-governmental organizations working
with Roma communities (Finland);
128.229 Repeal the law restricting freedom of expression on issues of sexual
orientation and gender identity and, in line with Council of Europe case law,
establish a legal framework for the recognition of gender transition and for the
protection of same-sex couples (France);
128.230 Repeal the discriminatory amendments against LGBTQI+ people to
the law on preschool and school education adopted in August 2024
(Luxembourg);
128.231 Repeal the provision of the amendment to article 11 (2) of the
Preschool and School Education Act, adopted on 7 August 2024, which restricts
the discussion of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities in educational
settings (Belgium);
A/HRC/61/11
22 GE.25-20490
128.232 Repeal amendments to the Preschool and School Education Act to
enable inclusive education and protect the rights of LGBTQIA+ persons
(Australia);
128.233 Remove the 2024 amendments to the Preschool and School Education
Act, which prohibit so-called nontraditional sexual orientation propaganda
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
128.234 Review the amendment to the Preschool and School Education Act to
ensure its full compliance with ratified human rights treaties, guaranteeing that
the rights of LGBTIQ+ people are not violated (Mexico);
128.235 Reinforce legal safeguards for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons and consider repealing the restrictive provisions in the 2024 law
on amendments and supplements to the law on preschool and school education,
which may infringe upon their right to education (Thailand);
128.236 Prevent discrimination against LGBT+ persons and repeal restrictions
on inclusive education. Strengthen protection against discrimination and ensure
proportionality in removal orders affecting members of the Roma community
(Norway);
128.237 Strengthen legal protections against intimidation of, or attacks on,
people who provide information on, promote and publicly advocate for LGBTI
rights (Slovenia);
128.238 Effectively enforce the law on amendments to the Criminal Code to
prevent and prosecute hate speech and crimes, including in media outlets
(Indonesia);
128.239 Intensify efforts to prevent and combat discrimination and violence
based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, including through
awareness campaigns, access to justice and protection services for the LGBTIQ+
community (Brazil);
128.240 Ensure explicit protection against hate crimes based on sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, and sex characteristics (Iceland);
128.241 Amend the Family Code to recognize same-sex parental rights and
allow adoption by same-sex couples (Iceland);
128.242 Strengthen the protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons by amending the Family Code to recognize same-sex parental
rights, recognizing civil partnerships of same-sex couples and including sexual
orientation and gender identity as grounds for hate crimes (Portugal);
128.243 Introduce a transparent administrative self-identification process for
legal gender recognition free from intrusive requirements (Iceland);
128.244 Amend education legislation to remove discriminatory provisions
targeting persons of diverse sexual orientation, gender identity and expression,
and sex characteristics (Iceland);
128.245 Ensure humane treatment and due process for migrants and asylum-
seekers (Islamic Republic of Iran);
128.246 Ensure that migrant reception centres offer adequate and safe living
conditions, particularly for minors (Canada);
128.247 Further improve living conditions for migrants and establish
alternatives to deprivation of liberty (Japan);
128.248 Establish a functional integration mechanism for migrants, refugees
and asylum-seekers, applicable throughout the territory (Mexico);
128.249 Effectively implement national strategies for the protection of the
rights of refugees and migrants to ensure their integration into society without
discrimination (China);
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 23
128.250 Scale-up efforts to ensure migrants access to justice, social protection
and non-discrimination in the labour market (Nepal);
128.251 Ensure that the principle of non-refoulement is strictly respected, and
that all asylum-seekers and migrants are protected against pushbacks and have
access to information on asylum procedures and to legal aid (Liechtenstein);
128.252 Enhance human rights-based approaches to border management to
ensure that the rights of migrants and asylum-seekers are upheld at all times
(Philippines);
128.253 Undertake necessary measures to allow and facilitate the use of mother
tongues in political campaigns as recommended during the second universal
periodic review cycle (Türkiye);
128.254 Monitor the implementation of the National Map of Social Services to
ensure equitable service coverage across the territory (El Salvador);
128.255 Ensure access to fair asylum procedures (Norway);
128.256 Undertake measures to ensure the humanitarian treatment of asylum-
seekers and refugees, regardless of their origin, including through proper
reception conditions, access to information and independent monitoring of
border procedures (Brazil).
129. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/61/11
24 GE.25-20490
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Bulgaria was headed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Georg
Georgiev, and composed of the following members:
• Mr. Angel Bandjov, Director of the Directorate for Human Rights, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria, Deputy Head of Delegation;
• Ms. Mihaela Mechkunova-Stamboliyska, Deputy Minister of Justice of the Republic
of Bulgaria;
• Mr. Filip Popov, Deputy Minister of Interior of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Mr. Ivan Krastev, Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Policy of the Republic of
Bulgaria;
• Ms. Daniela Saveklieva, Secretary of the National Commission for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Boyana Trifonova, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Bulgaria
to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva and
Chargée d'affaires a.i.;
• Mr. Lyubomir Talev, Director of the Council of Legislation Directorate, Ministry of
Justice of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Veselina Ganeva, Director of the International Cooperation Directorate, Ministry
of Education and Science of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Yanitsa Ryapova, Director of the Directorate for Quality of the International
Protection Procedure, State Agency for Refugees at the Council of Ministers of the
Republic of Bulgaria;
• Mr. Iliya Nachev, Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Bulgaria;
• Ms. Ivana Topalova, Expert in the Cabinet of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Bulgaria;
• Mr. Milorad Yordanov, Head of Territorial Services Sector, Unit for Security Police,
Directorate-General for National Police, Ministry of Interior of the Republic of
Bulgaria;
• Ms. Irina Ivanova, Head of Unit for Equal Opportunities, Anti-Discrimination and
Social Assistance, Directorate for Policy on Persons with Disabilities, Equal
Opportunities and Social Assistance, Ministry of Labour and Social Policy of the
Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Tonislava Sotirova, Head of Unit for Social Inclusion, Children, and Family
Policies, Directorate of Social Inclusion, Ministry of Labour and Social Policy of the
Republic of Bulgaria;
• Dr. Boyana Aleksov, Chief Expert in the Directorate for Inclusive Education, Ministry
of Education and Science of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Ernesta Rousseva, Chief Expert, National Commission for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Ahavni Topakbashyan, Secretariat of the National Council for Cooperation on
Ethnic and Integration Issues of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Hristiana Grozdanova, Head of Unit for Human Rights, Directorate for Human
Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Natali Pavlova, Second Secretary at the Unit for Human Rights, Directorate for
Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria;
A/HRC/61/11
GE.25-20490 25
• Mr. Plamen Dermendzhiev, Attaché at the Unit for Human Rights, Directorate for
Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria;
• Ms. Daiana Parapanova, Attaché at the Permanent Representation of the Republic of
Bulgaria to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in
Geneva;
• Ms. Nelly Yakimova, Interpreter.
