GE.23-10727 (E) 040723 050723
Human Rights Council
Fifty-fourth session
11 September–6 October 2023
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Burundi
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/54/11
General Assembly Distr.: General
21 June 2023
English
Original: English/French
A/HRC/54/11
2 GE.23-10727
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its forty-third session from 1 to 12 May 2023.
The review of Burundi was held at the 7th meeting, on 4 May 2023. The delegation of
Burundi was headed by the Minister of National Solidarity, Social Affairs, Human Rights
and Gender, Imelde Sabushimiike. At its 16th meeting, held on 10 May 2023, the Working
Group adopted the report on Burundi.
2. On 11 January 2023, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Burundi: Argentina, Bangladesh and Senegal.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution
5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Burundi:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Germany, Liechtenstein, Panama,
Portugal, on behalf of the Group of Friends on national mechanisms for implementation,
reporting and follow-up, Slovenia, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Burundi through the troika.
These questions are available on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Burundi stated that Burundi had always kept to the schedule of
previous universal periodic review cycles. Human rights were highly important for the
Government of Burundi, which strove to ensure that they were promoted and protected in all
spheres of life.
6. Great importance was accorded to the national report of Burundi as it was drawn up
following consultations with national stakeholders in collaboration with non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and development partners.
7. Since the previous cycle of the universal periodic review, Burundi had adopted a new
Constitution by means of a constitutional referendum. It had held peaceful and transparent
elections in 2020, which had resulted in the establishment of democratically elected
republican institutions.
8. Burundi was committed to strengthening the promotion and protection of human
rights. It was also pleased to note that, in June 2021, the Independent National Human Rights
Commission had been reaccredited with category A status in accordance with the principles
relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
(the Paris Principles). Burundi had continued to increase the budget allocated to the
commission every year.
9. In the judicial sphere, in addition to adopting various laws on the organization of the
courts and tribunals, civil procedure, and the organization of the profession of notary,
1 A/HRC/WG.6/43/BDI/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/43/BDI/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/43/BDI/3.
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 3
Burundi had established a legal aid strategy in 2018 with a view to improving access to justice
for all, in particular for vulnerable individuals and groups.
10. Burundi had replaced custodial sentences with community service for certain minor
offences and had introduced presidential pardons, parole for prisoners who had served a
quarter of their sentence and a provisional release campaign enabling defendants to appear
before the courts without being held in custody, except in cases involving murder, rape and
offences against national security.
11. In the economic and social spheres, the agricultural sector had been identified as a
priority and a pillar of development in Burundi. With this in mind, the Government provided
financial support to cooperatives and subsidized 70 per cent of the costs of fertilizers and
agricultural inputs. In order to promote the economic development of women and young
people, specific financial institutions had been set up, namely, the Banque d’investissement
et de développement pour les femmes, the Banque d’investissement pour les jeunes and a
local support mechanism for young people.
12. Groups that were clearly vulnerable, such as older persons, persons with disabilities
and demobilized persons with combat-related disabilities, were supported by various
government programmes. The programmes cited as examples related to the provision of free
health care for older persons, the provision of mobility devices for persons with disabilities,
and the establishment of a micro-financing scheme to support income-generating activities
for demobilized war veterans.
13. The delegation of Burundi was pleased to note that security prevailed in the country,
that large groups of refugees were voluntarily returning and being welcomed and integrated,
that the public was strongly supportive of community development work, that flows of people
could be seen entering Burundi and that foreign investors were clearly taking an interest in
the country.
14. The delegation of Burundi reiterated the commitment of Burundi to the promotion and
protection of human rights.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
15. During the interactive dialogue, 105 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
16. Djibouti commended the efforts by Burundi to strengthen and promote human rights
in its domestic legislation.
17. The Dominican Republic recognized the efforts by Burundi at the institutional level
with the adoption of the National Policy on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its
Action Plan 2020–2024.
18. Egypt appreciated the efforts of Burundi to improve the human rights situation and
commended its institutional framework.
19. Estonia commended Burundi on its progress in combating human trafficking and
appreciated the Independent National Human Rights Commission’s reaccreditation with A
status.
20. Finland acknowledged the progress made by Burundi in the areas of human rights and
good governance, and commended Burundi for its engagement in dialogue.
21. Ethiopia commended Burundi for implementing universal periodic review
recommendations and strengthening human rights promotion and protection.
22. Gabon hailed the efforts of Burundi since the last review and the cooperation with
United Nations human rights mechanisms.
23. The Gambia commended Burundi on its continued and constructive engagement with
the universal periodic review mechanism.
A/HRC/54/11
4 GE.23-10727
24. Georgia remained concerned by the lack of cooperation by Burundi with regional and
international mechanisms.
25. Germany remained concerned by the renewed narrowing of political and civic space
and the lack of structural changes.
26. Ghana acknowledged the establishment of the National Gender Commission and the
national preventive mechanism against torture.
27. Greece welcomed legislation on, inter alia, the protection of persons with disabilities
and the promotion of their rights.
28. Honduras congratulated Burundi on adopting measures to ensure the effective
participation of women in public affairs.
29. Iceland welcomed the national report of Burundi.
30. India hailed the efforts of Burundi regarding judicial reform, revision of the Labour
Code and the establishment of the National Gender Commission.
31. Indonesia welcomed the measures by Burundi to combat gender-based violence,
including the establishment of the National Gender Commission.
32. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended Burundi on its measures to make public
services more efficient, transparent and accountable.
33. Iraq supported measures taken to respect and uphold human rights and harmonize
national legislation with international standards.
34. Ireland welcomed the renewal of the mandate of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.
35. Italy commended measures taken to promote women’s participation in decision-
making processes and institutions.
36. Kenya applauded Burundi for its progress in promoting human rights since its last
universal periodic review.
37. Kuwait commended Burundi on progress made in promoting the right to a fair trial.
38. Latvia urged Burundi to make further efforts to fulfil human rights obligations and
commitments.
39. Libya applauded Burundi for its efforts to adopt legislation and policies and for its
National Development Plan 2018–2027.
40. Liechtenstein thanked Burundi for providing information during the opening remarks
and for the national report.
41. Lithuania expressed concern about reports of torture, sexual abuse, arbitrary arrests,
and intimidation of journalists and human rights advocates.
42. Luxembourg thanked Burundi for its presentation of the national report.
43. Malawi acknowledged advancements in human rights protection, such as passing
human rights legislation and strengthening the Ombudsman’s mandate.
44. Malaysia commended Burundi for its strong commitment to protect human rights, and
its measures to address gender-based violence, prevent trafficking and provide free basic
education.
45. Maldives commended Burundi for its efforts to address climate change and promote
women’s representation in the Government and Parliament.
46. Malta expressed concern over human rights defenders’ safety, the absence of a torture
prevention mechanism and continued extrajudicial executions and unlawful deaths.
47. Mauritania acknowledged the National Development Plan 2018–2027 for poverty
eradication and economic transformation.
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 5
48. Mauritius commended Burundi for improving human rights conditions, providing free
education and establishing banks for women.
49. Mexico appreciated the efforts by Burundi to eradicate violence against women and
to establish the National Gender Commission.
50. Montenegro acknowledged the measures taken by Burundi to strengthen its legal and
institutional framework.
51. Morocco commended Burundi for the establishment of a national mechanism for
preventing torture.
52. Mozambique commended Burundi for establishing an institutional framework
favourable for the respect of human rights in the country.
53. Namibia appreciated the measures taken by Burundi to combat gender-based violence
and its appointing of gender focal points in all police stations, courts and tribunals.
54. Nepal commended Burundi for its efforts to implement the National Strategy to
Combat Gender-based Violence.
55. The Kingdom of the Netherlands remained concerned about the general human rights
situation, particularly gender inequalities and the treatment of sexual and gender minorities.
56. The Niger welcomed the remarkable progress that Burundi had made in strengthening
the legislative and institutional framework, such as the Independent National Human Rights
Commission’s reaccreditation with A status.
57. Nigeria welcomed the significant progress that Burundi had made in the
administration of juvenile justice.
58. Norway was concerned about continued human rights violations in Burundi, including
impunity for extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, torture and sexual violence.
59. Oman commended Burundi for its National Development Plan 2018–2027 for
structural transformation of the economy.
60. Pakistan appreciated the cooperation by Burundi with the United Nations human
rights and universal periodic review mechanisms.
61. Paraguay encouraged Burundi to continue its efforts in combating human trafficking,
including investigations, prosecutions and convictions of traffickers.
62. The Philippines recognized the steps taken by Burundi to strengthen its institutional
framework on human rights.
63. Poland was concerned by reports of increased human rights violations, including
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, cases of torture and cruel or degrading
treatment, and violence against women.
64. Portugal commended the reaccreditation of the national human rights institution of
Burundi with A status.
65. The Republic of Korea recognized the progress made by Burundi in strengthening its
legal and institutional framework.
66. Romania was particularly encouraged by the progress that Burundi had made in
combating human trafficking.
67. The Russian Federation appreciated the efforts made by Burundi to prevent
discrimination against national and religious minorities.
68. Saudi Arabia welcomed the measures taken by Burundi to promote and protect the
rights of persons with disabilities.
69. Senegal appreciated the efforts of Burundi to strengthen its national human rights
institutions and mechanisms.
70. Serbia welcomed various measures taken by Burundi to prevent and address gender-
based violence.
A/HRC/54/11
6 GE.23-10727
71. Sierra Leone welcomed measures taken to prevent and punish trafficking in persons,
such as the setting up of a consultation and monitoring commission in 2022.
72. Singapore commended progress made in the protection of vulnerable groups,
including persons with disabilities.
73. Slovakia acknowledged efforts by Burundi to improve the human rights situation but
noted continued violations of freedom of expression and media freedom.
74. Slovenia called upon Burundi to ensure a safe and enabling environment for civil
society, human rights defenders and journalists.
75. South Africa welcomed, inter alia, the renewal of the mandates of the Office of the
Ombudsman and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
76. Somalia appreciated the legal and institutional frameworks in Burundi to promote
economic, political and social development.
77. South Sudan commended Burundi for the measures taken on reopening civil society
organizations that had been suspended in 2015.
78. Spain welcomed the progress made which had led to the restoration of A status to the
Independent National Human Rights Commission.
79. Sri Lanka welcomed progressive institutional and judicial measures taken to combat
gender-based violence.
80. The Sudan commended Burundi on its progress on legal reform, which included laws
on the rights of persons with disabilities.
81. Switzerland welcomed the measures taken to set up effectively the national preventive
mechanism against torture within the Independent National Human Rights Commission.
82. The Syrian Arab Republic welcomed the significant progress achieved in the
protection and promotion of human rights.
83. Togo commended the measures taken by Burundi to promote the rights of women,
children, persons with disabilities and Indigenous Peoples.
84. Tunisia valued the progress made by Burundi in implementing universal periodic
review recommendations, including the National Human Rights Policy 2018–2023 and the
National Development Plan 2018–2027.
85. Türkiye appreciated the efforts of Burundi to strengthen freedom of the media and
freedom of expression by reopening some media outlets.
86. Uganda commended Burundi for its positive milestones, which included the new
Constitution in 2018 and other legal developments.
87. Ukraine called upon Burundi to fully implement the recommendations accepted
during its previous universal periodic review.
88. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed positive
developments, but expressed concern about insufficient improvements.
89. The United Republic of Tanzania congratulated Burundi on its measures to facilitate
the safe voluntary return of refugees.
90. In response to the questions raised, the delegation of Burundi stated that Burundi had
set up a department responsible for drafting initial and periodic reports and following up on
recommendations.
91. A new national policy on social protection had been developed with a view to
promoting universal and equitable social protection for all.
92. A national programme for strengthening the capacities of women had been set up to
tackle the problem of socioeconomic gender inequality.
93. Promoting and protecting the rights of older persons was also one of the Government’s
priorities.
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 7
94. With regard to the abolition of the death penalty, Burundi had undertaken to remove
this cruel and inhuman practice from its laws. The delegation of Burundi therefore found it
illogical that Burundi should be recommended to ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death
penalty.
95. Burundi was continuing to conduct an internal review of the appropriateness of
ratifying the conventions on the status of stateless persons. The delegation of Burundi drew
attention to the adoption of the Nationality Code.
96. The process of adopting the child protection code was at a very advanced stage.
97. The United States of America commended steps to combat trafficking in persons,
facilitate refugee return and host refugees, but remained concerned regarding the situation of
civil and political rights in Burundi.
98. Uruguay welcomed laws on the rights of persons with disabilities, higher education,
and the revision of the Labour Code.
99. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela commended efforts to provide free basic
education, and the National Health Policy 2016–2025.
100. Viet Nam welcomed measures to strengthen social cohesion and security and to
consolidate social and economic development programmes.
101. Yemen noted achievements in the strengthening of national human rights institutions
and mechanisms.
102. Zambia thanked the delegation of Burundi for the presentation of the national report.
103. Zimbabwe welcomed the strengthening of national human rights institutions and
mechanisms, including the establishment of the department for the prevention of gender-
based violence and the holistic care of victims.
104. Afghanistan praised efforts, but noted concerns about the low rate of secondary school
completion among girls.
105. Algeria commended the strengthening of national human rights institutions, including
the decentralization of the Office of the Ombudsman.
106. Angola indicated support for efforts by Burundi to find lasting solutions to improve
the living conditions of the population.
107. Argentina made recommendations.
108. Australia commended efforts to tackle corruption, but expressed concern about reports
of alleged torture, abuse and incarceration of journalists and human rights activists.
109. Azerbaijan commended measures taken to make public services more efficient,
transparent and accountable.
110. Belgium stated that, despite some progress such as in combating human trafficking,
the human rights situation remained worrying.
111. Benin welcomed the reaccreditation of the Independent National Human Rights
Commission with A status.
112. With regard to the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, the delegation
of Burundi mentioned that the National Policy for the Protection of Children had been
established.
113. With regard to child marriage, there was no derogation permitting marriage below the
minimum age established in law. The delegation of Burundi recalled that committees for the
protection of the rights of the child and the National Children’s Forum had been established
in Burundi.
114. The delegation of Burundi was pleased to note that children’s vulnerability was being
addressed and that Burundi was making efforts to help children living in street situations.
A/HRC/54/11
8 GE.23-10727
115. With regard to persons with disabilities, Burundi had ratified the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Africa.
116. With regard to gender equality, Burundi has committed itself to combating gender-
based violence and had established a department responsible for preventing such violence
and providing comprehensive care to victims. Burundi had also set up various mechanisms
in this area. The delegation of Burundi also pointed out that, under a programme to strengthen
women’s economic empowerment, the Banque d’investissement et de développement pour
les femmes had been established.
117. With regard to the fight against poverty, Burundi was committed to tackling structural
vulnerabilities and social inequalities. A national policy for the provision of universal social
protection had already been put in place.
118. Where education was concerned, Burundi had introduced free schooling. The
Ministry of Education had also set up an inclusive education office, which, among other
achievements, had developed standardized guides to inclusive education.
119. With regard to the right to health and national health policy, children and retired
persons were entitled to free health care. A system of universal health coverage was being
developed.
120. In the sphere of justice, the delegation of Burundi stated that Burundi had never stood
idly by when people’s lives were in danger.
121. Burundi had pledged to join the international community in the fight against
trafficking in persons. An ad hoc committee to combat trafficking in persons and the
Consultation and Monitoring Committee on Preventing and Combating Trafficking in
Persons had been established in 2021.
122. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed the quota to guarantee the presence of
women in political institutions.
123. Brazil commended the expansion of access to primary education for children but
remained concerned about the situation of human rights defenders.
124. Burkina Faso encouraged Burundi to pursue its efforts aimed at greater effectiveness
of human rights on the ground.
125. Cameroon considered that Burundi was in a positive dynamic.
126. Canada was deeply concerned about arbitrary detention and the suppression of civil
society activities.
127. Chad welcomed the significant progress made by Burundi in the promotion and
protection of human rights.
128. Chile highlighted the legislative advances regarding the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.
129. China welcomed the constructive participation of Burundi in the universal periodic
review and commended its efforts and achievements in promoting and protecting human
rights. China noted the positive achievements of Burundi in promoting socioeconomic
development, protecting the rights of children and persons with disabilities, promoting
health-care services, mitigating disasters and combating sexual violence.
130. Colombia made recommendations.
131. The Congo noted progress made by Burundi in fighting human trafficking.
132. Costa Rica congratulated Burundi on the A status accreditation of the Independent
National Human Rights Commission.
133. Côte d’Ivoire congratulated Burundi on its efforts in protecting and promoting human
rights, including the law relating to the rights of persons with disabilities.
134. Cuba recognized efforts in implementing accepted recommendations from previous
cycles and in meeting the Sustainable Development Goals.
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 9
135. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended Burundi on its efforts and
progress in the promotion and protection of human rights by strengthening its legislative and
institutional framework.
136. Denmark regretted that an effective national preventive mechanism against torture
had not been established.
137. France praised efforts to protect human rights, notably by tackling prison
overcrowding and human trafficking.
138. The delegation of Burundi stressed that a distinction should be made between the
young Imbonerakure and the security forces, which were provided for in the Constitution and
carried out the State’s sovereign missions while respecting human rights. It added that if
members of the security forces committed an offence, they would to be required to appear
before the public prosecutor’s office attached to the ordinary courts.
139. The delegation of Burundi also mentioned the establishment of a network to facilitate
communication between the administration, coordinators and the police.
140. Lastly, the delegation of Burundi stated that Burundi accorded great importance to
respect for freedom of expression and religion.
141. Safety and hygiene conditions in detention facilities had been improved for prisoners.
Burundi had also made improvements to rehabilitation and social reintegration programmes
and had set up monitoring mechanisms.
142. With regard to the ratification of conventions, Burundi was awaiting the opinion of its
experts, who were due to complete their analysis.
143. With regard to the ratification of the International Labour Organization (ILO)
Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), Burundi had already made significant
progress in adopting Act No. 1/11 of 24 November 2020, which addressed the situation of
domestic workers.
144. The delegation of Burundi thanked the Member States comprising the troika, namely,
Argentina, Bangladesh and Senegal. The recommendations arising from the universal
periodic review would be subjected to in-depth analysis and the Government of Burundi
would devote particular attention to them. The delegation also thanked the Vice-President
and the delegations who had supported the efforts made by Burundi to promote and protect
human rights, which remained an ideal for all countries to attain.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
145. The following recommendations will be examined by Burundi, which will
provide responses in due time, but no later than the fifty-fourth session of the Human
Rights Council:
145.1 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
(Colombia);
145.2 Study the ratification of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (Chile);
145.3 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina) (Dominican Republic) (Luxembourg)
(Niger) (Ukraine);
145.4 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and recognize the competence of the Committee
on Enforced Disappearances (Uruguay);
A/HRC/54/11
10 GE.23-10727
145.5 Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Gabon) (Gambia) (Senegal);
145.6 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Congo) (Niger) (Nigeria)
(Togo);
145.7 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Gambia)
(Mauritania) (Somalia);
145.8 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Paraguay);
145.9 Accede to the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (Brazil);
145.10 Ratify the two Optional Protocols relating to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in particular the Optional Protocol
aimed at abolishing the death penalty (Togo);
145.11 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Slovenia);
145.12 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Benin);
145.13 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty (Côte d’Ivoire);
145.14 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Estonia);
145.15 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Namibia);
145.16 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Mexico);
145.17 Establish an official moratorium on the use of the death penalty and
ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Romania);
145.18 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death
penalty, as well as rejoining the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court (France);
145.19 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Latvia);
145.20 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to abolishing the death penalty
(Sierra Leone);
145.21 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Iceland);
145.22 Adopt the necessary measures to finalize the procedure for the
accession of Burundi to the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons,
of 1954, and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of 1961 (Côte
d’Ivoire);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 11
145.23 Ratify the Convention against Discrimination in Education from 1960
in line with the recommendation of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (Mauritius);
145.24 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education
1960 (Nigeria);
145.25 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education
(Plurinational State of Bolivia);
145.26 Ratify the Rome Statute in its 2010 version (Liechtenstein);
145.27 Continue to cooperate with the United Nations country team in
Burundi and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to fulfil national and international human rights obligations (Zimbabwe);
145.28 Continue strengthening collaboration with human rights mechanisms
at the regional and international levels, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights as well as this august Council (Somalia);
145.29 Cooperate fully with the United Nations human rights protection
mechanisms and other regional and international organizations (Georgia);
145.30 Strengthen its engagement and cooperation with the Human Rights
Council mechanisms, including regional mechanisms (Sierra Leone);
145.31 Continue its cooperation with human rights bodies and mechanisms at
both the regional and the international levels (Ethiopia);
145.32 Strengthen cooperation with international human rights mechanisms
(Cameroon);
145.33 Take meaningful measures to improve relations and cooperation with
international human rights mechanisms (Switzerland);
145.34 Cooperate constructively with international human rights monitoring
mechanisms and allow them unimpeded access to the country (Lithuania);
145.35 Cooperate fully with the United Nations special procedure mandate
holders and relevant treaty bodies, including the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Burundi, and respond to all pending visit requests
(Latvia);
145.36 Cooperate fully with the established United Nations human rights
mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of the human
rights in Burundi (Montenegro);
145.37 Cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Burundi by allowing full and unhindered access to the country and by
providing all information needed to fulfil its mandate (Norway);
145.38 Allow United Nations human rights mechanisms and other regional
monitors to conduct investigations on allegations of human rights violations
across the country, unimpeded and without restrictions (Malta);
145.39 Grant access to the Special Rapporteur, and actively engage with the
Human Rights Council (Germany);
145.40 Fulfil its obligation to cooperate with United Nations mechanisms and
allow special procedures mandate holders to conduct visits to the country
(Canada);
145.41 Implement the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Burundi and the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi in their reports and cooperate fully with the special procedures mandate
holders and the relevant treaty bodies (Luxembourg);
A/HRC/54/11
12 GE.23-10727
145.42 Strengthen and advance the institutionalization of the Standing
Committee in charge of preparing initial and periodic reports to the treaty bodies
(Plurinational State of Bolivia);
145.43 Continue with efforts to submit all outstanding reports to the United
Nations human rights treaty bodies (Malawi);
145.44 Intensify efforts to submit national reports to the treaty bodies and
discuss them on time (Iraq);
145.45 Take concrete steps to submit outstanding periodic reports to treaty
bodies, including seeking technical assistance and capacity-building (Sierra
Leone);
145.46 Restore cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and allow the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi access to the country (Paraguay);
145.47 Engage fully with the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies
working to improve the human rights situation in Burundi (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
145.48 Reopen the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Burundi (Georgia);
145.49 Present a timeline for the reopening of the OHCHR country office in
Burundi (Liechtenstein);
145.50 Continue with its efforts to ensure enjoyment of human rights for all
citizens (Mozambique);
145.51 Continue further strengthening its institutional framework with a view
to respect for all human rights (Ethiopia);
145.52 Continue to take targeted steps to improve national legislation in terms
of respect for human rights and freedoms (Russian Federation);
145.53 Continue its efforts in improving legislation, institutions and
mechanisms to strengthen the enjoyment of human rights (Türkiye);
145.54 Continue efforts to improve good governance and institutional reform
of the public service (Sudan);
145.55 Continue to mobilize international support to advance the
implementation of the National Development Plan 2018–2027 (Syrian Arab
Republic);
145.56 Continue to promote sustainable economic and social development and
implement relevant national development plans (China);
145.57 Continue its efforts to fulfil international obligations by further
developing and implementing the comprehensive and concrete national
programmes aimed at meeting the objectives of the National Social Protection
Strategy (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea);
145.58 Take measures to ensure the rule of law by strengthening national
human rights institutions and ensuring access to legal rights services (Germany);
145.59 Take measures to further strengthen the formal and material
independence of the National Human Rights Commission in accordance with the
Paris Principles (Namibia);
145.60 Guarantee the independence of the Human Rights Commission and
provide it with both material and financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
mandate (Sierra Leone);
145.61 Continue efforts to ensure the independence of the National
Independent Human Rights Commission (South Africa);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 13
145.62 Pursue efforts to guarantee the formal and material independence of
the Independent National Human Rights Commission by providing it with
sufficient material, human and financial resources to fulfil its mandate (Côte
d’Ivoire);
145.63 Guarantee equal protection of the law to everyone, without
discrimination, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (France);
145.64 Step up efforts to combat discriminatory practices against ethnic,
political and religious minorities (Gabon);
145.65 Support the United Nations resolution for a universal moratorium on
the use of the death penalty, and adhere to the Safe Schools Declaration (Italy);
145.66 Guarantee that actions by the State security forces are fully consistent
with international human rights law, thoroughly investigate persistent
allegations of arbitrary arrests, torture, extrajudicial killings and enforced
disappearances, mainly targeting the opposition, and prosecute those responsible
for such acts, including members of the security forces and Imbonerakure
(Spain);
145.67 Investigate and prosecute those accused of alleged extrajudicial
killings and torture (Australia);
145.68 End human rights violations, conduct prompt and impartial
investigations, and prosecute those responsible in fair trials (Georgia);
145.69 Investigate and pursue accountability, where appropriate, for all
allegations of harassment, intimidation, or disappearances of opposition party
members, including those committed by members of police and other security
forces (United States of America);
145.70 Investigate and prosecute individuals allegedly responsible for crimes
under international law and other grave human rights violations and abuses, in
fair trials (Denmark);
145.71 Undertake immediately independent, effective and impartial
investigations into allegations of extrajudicial executions and unlawful and
excessive use of force by security forces, and prosecute those suspected of being
responsible (Finland);
145.72 Conduct a comprehensive investigation into allegations of arbitrary
arrests, torture and unlawful detention by law enforcement and other national
security structures (Malta);
145.73 Undertake independent and transparent investigations into all
allegations of human rights violations (Republic of Korea);
145.74 Ensure that crimes against human rights defenders, journalists,
LGBTIQ people, Indigenous Peoples, and members of the opposition and civil
society are properly investigated, and that those responsible are held accountable
(Norway);
145.75 Intensify efforts to hold all perpetrators of crimes found by the
Commission of Inquiry, including the crimes of extrajudicial killing, arbitrary
arrest or detention, torture and sexual violence, criminally accountable, and
adopt reparation measures (Liechtenstein);
145.76 Prosecute those alleged to be responsible for summary executions,
unlawful killings and other acts of violence and torture, on the basis of thorough,
transparent, impartial and independent investigations (Belgium);
145.77 Establish protection mechanisms to prevent and investigate
complaints of torture and excessive use of force, ill-treatment and abuse of
authority by members of the police, security and intelligence services, eliminate
A/HRC/54/11
14 GE.23-10727
impunity and release all political prisoners, journalists and human rights
defenders (Costa Rica);
145.78 Continue strengthening national mechanisms for the prevention of
human rights violations and abuses (Kenya);
145.79 Establish an independent and effective mechanism to investigate
complaints of torture and ill-treatment committed by members of the police and
security forces and intelligence services that encourages complaints by victims
(Dominican Republic);
145.80 Establish an independent mechanism for investigating complaints of
torture or ill-treatment perpetrated by State actors, and facilitate a complaints
procedure for victims (Ireland);
145.81 Establish an independent mechanism to investigate complaints against
government forces for torture and ill-treatment, and to encourage complaints by
victims (Paraguay);
145.82 Establish an independent mechanism to investigate allegations of
torture and ill-treatment committed by members of the police, security forces
and intelligence services (Argentina);
145.83 Establish an independent mechanism to investigate complaints of
torture and ill-treatment committed by members of the police, security forces
and intelligence services, protecting complainants (Chile);
145.84 Expedite the legislative review process to effectively establish the
national mechanism for the prevention of torture (Montenegro);
145.85 Pursue efforts to effectively set up the national preventive mechanism
against torture, notably by speeding up the adoption of the corresponding
legislative amendments (Switzerland);
145.86 Implement without delay an effective national preventive mechanism
against torture, as set out in the draft amendment to the law on the Human
Rights Commission, of 2021 (Denmark);
145.87 Consider the establishment of an effective national preventive
mechanism regarding torture, as required by the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment (Ukraine);
145.88 Strengthen the Penal Code provisions against torture and ill-
treatment, in accordance with its international commitments (Poland);
145.89 Re-examine legislation concerning crimes against the security of the
State with the aim of strengthening legal certainty and preventing arbitrary
arrest (Germany);
145.90 Guarantee the rights of detainees, in line with international standards,
prevent and combat torture and implement a fully transparent, equitable and
independent judicial system (Italy);
145.91 Continue measures to improve prison conditions and reduce
overcrowding (France);
145.92 Continue efforts to address overcrowding in prisons and improve
health-care services there (Iraq);
145.93 Improve the situation in detention centres by taking measures to
reduce overcrowding (Germany);
145.94 Disarm and demobilize the Imbonerakure, and take concrete steps to
reform the police and security forces, as well as the National Intelligence Service
(Norway);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 15
145.95 Proceed without delay with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the Imbonerakure militia (Luxembourg);
145.96 Continue to engage in a dialogue with the stakeholders involved in the
conflict in Burundi, to restore peace and security and guarantee the enjoyment
of their human rights (South Sudan);
145.97 Rejoin, as a State party, the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (Latvia);
145.98 Reconsider the decision to withdraw from the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (Portugal);
145.99 Reconsider the withdrawal from the International Criminal Court
(Italy);
145.100 Take specific measures to ensure the implementation of the action plan
on the National Observatory for the Prevention and Eradication of Genocide,
War Crimes and Other Crimes against Humanity (Angola);
145.101 Continue efforts to address endemic corruption by implementing the
national strategy for good governance and anti-corruption and holding
accountable those who have misused public office for private gain (United States
of America);
145.102 Continue efforts to promote social and economic rights, such as the
rights to education, health and employment (Greece);
145.103 Accelerate the implementation of the National Development Plan
2018–2027, taking positive steps to promote the rights of the people of Burundi,
including the rights of vulnerable groups such as the poor, women and youth
(Zimbabwe);
145.104 Strengthen the rule of law and the administration of justice through
an analysis of access to justice, legal aid programmes and capacity-building for
judges (Dominican Republic);
145.105 Strengthen the Truth and Reconciliation Commission as it will have
significant importance in ensuring transitional justice (Ethiopia);
145.106 Strengthen the mandate of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
and redouble efforts to advance other pillars of transitional justice, such as
accountability, reparations, institutional reforms through land restitution, and
reforms of the security and justice sectors (Colombia);
145.107 Take the necessary measures to reform the judicial system and ensure
its independence to reach justice in order to overcome impunity (Libya);
145.108 Take effective measures to establish an independent judiciary (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
145.109 Adopt measures to ensure progress with regard to accountability,
reparations, and institutional reforms through land restitution, as pillars of
transitional justice (Honduras);
145.110 Strengthen the promotion of fundamental freedoms of expression and
association (Cameroon);
145.111 Ensure freedom of expression and association, and create a safe and
enabling environment for civil society (Italy);
145.112 Fully guarantee the unduly restricted freedoms of expression, the
press, association and peaceful assembly, allowing the free activity of all the
media without exception, lifting the prohibitions on various human rights
organizations and facilitating their return to the country (Spain);
145.113 Adopt effective measures to guarantee the implementation of the
freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly (Brazil);
A/HRC/54/11
16 GE.23-10727
145.114 Take all necessary measures to guarantee freedom of peaceful
assembly and freedom of association and expression, free from intimidation,
reprisals or discrimination (Canada);
145.115 Adopt measures aimed at guaranteeing freedom of expression and
opinion, peaceful assembly and association, as well as the normal functioning of
civil society and human rights defenders (Argentina);
145.116 Guarantee freedom of assembly by refraining from arbitrary
interdictions of assemblies of political parties and civil society on all levels
(Germany);
145.117 Take all necessary measures to ensure the freedom and safety of media
and civil society (Indonesia);
145.118 Allow civil society activists, journalists and human rights
organizations to carry out their work without obstruction and reprisals,
including by lifting the legal and financial measures targeting them (Finland);
145.119 End any harassment and intimidation against human rights defenders,
journalists and media workers, and refrain from criminalizing their lawful
activities (Estonia);
145.120 End reprisals against human rights defenders, journalists and
members of the opposition and civil society (Norway);
145.121 Put an end to measures that intimidate journalists and human rights
defenders (Slovakia);
145.122 Adopt effective measures to end intimidation and harassment of
journalists (Ghana);
145.123 Establish a protection mechanism for human rights defenders, lift
measures that obstruct their work and overturn sentences imposed on human
rights defenders who are victims of judicial harassment (Slovakia);
145.124 Ensure a safe and enabling environment for civil society, human rights
defenders, journalists, and other media workers to carry out their work, without
fear of prosecution, intimidation or undue interference (Ireland);
145.125 Provide a safe and enabling environment for civil society, human
rights defenders, journalists and other media workers to conduct their work
independently (Montenegro);
145.126 Ensure a safe and enabling environment where civil society, human
rights defenders and media workers can exercise their rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly without fear of reprisal (Republic of Korea);
145.127 Ensure that human rights defenders are not subject to arbitrary
detention (United States of America);
145.128 Take measures to ensure that human rights defenders, journalists and
media workers can exercise their rights to the freedoms of opinion and
expression, peaceful assembly and association without fear of reprisals,
prosecution or intimidation (Lithuania);
145.129 Identify and implement policies which facilitate an active civil society
and an open media, and address in particular threats to journalists and human
rights defenders (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
145.130 Take all necessary measures to ensure that journalists and rights
defenders can carry out their activities without risk of arrest or reprisal
(France);
145.131 Strengthen measures to provide a safe and enabling environment so
that human rights defenders and journalists can carry out their work
independently, without undue interference (Colombia);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 17
145.132 Accelerate the revision of the press law in line with freedom of
expression standards and the adoption of a law on the protection of human rights
defenders (Luxembourg);
145.133 Continue and finalize the process of adopting a law on the protection
of human rights defenders that is in line with international law, notably with
regard to the protection of freedom of expression (Switzerland);
145.134 Increase efforts to modify the laws that regulate the media,
guaranteeing freedom of expression, and complying with commitments made by
the country at the regional and international levels (Uruguay);
145.135 Accelerate the revision of the law on freedom of the press and adopt
the amendments to put an end to the intimidation and persecution of journalists
and members of civil society carrying out their work (Belgium);
145.136 Lift all restrictive provisions applied since 2015, ensuring that civil
society actors, including media and journalists, can do their work freely,
independently and free from fear, intimidation or reprisals (Canada);
145.137 Expedite the review of the Press Law in accordance with the rules on
freedom of expression, and approve a law for the protection of human rights
defenders (Chile);
145.138 Promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to ethnic and
racial minorities, including with respect to education, employment, and
participation in public and political affairs (Australia);
145.139 Repeal or amend all discriminatory provisions in legislation, including
article 4 of the Nationality Code and article 122 of the Persons and Family Code
(Latvia);
145.140 Review provisions that discriminate on the basis of gender, and ensure
gender parity in inheritance (Honduras);
145.141 Continue its measures to combat trafficking in persons (Nepal);
145.142 Enhance its measures to combat trafficking in persons, including
assistance for victims and their families (Singapore);
145.143 Establish stronger international cooperation to develop and implement
social and economic development policies for poverty eradication and food
security and against malnutrition (Indonesia);
145.144 Pursue the efforts made in the fight against poverty through the
implementation of national reforms in the fields of education and health
(Morocco);
145.145 Redouble the Government’s efforts to continue fighting against
poverty by working more towards the development of families and the country
(South Sudan);
145.146 Continue efforts to eradicate poverty (United Republic of Tanzania);
145.147 Continue policies and programmes aimed at reducing poverty levels
(Sudan);
145.148 Coordinate and enact policies and programmes that will enable the
eradication of poverty among the masses through nationally driven programmes
(Uganda);
145.149 Continue strengthening its social policies in favour of the most
vulnerable sectors of the population (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
145.150 Guarantee that social education, health and food programmes have
sufficient financing to continue advancing in the fight against exclusion and
poverty (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
A/HRC/54/11
18 GE.23-10727
145.151 Continue efforts to implement national programmes that help reduce
poverty and provide for the needs of the population (Yemen);
145.152 Approve and implement policies to improve the socioeconomic
conditions of people living in poverty, and mobilize resources to reduce the rate
of chronic malnutrition in the country (Paraguay);
145.153 Increase investments in local food systems to make them more resilient
to internal and external shocks, in line with Sustainable Development Goal 2
(Angola);
145.154 Pursue efforts to establish a non-contributory social protection system
to improve the living conditions of the Burundian population (Benin);
145.155 Continue to implement social housing construction programmes as
well as measures for access to decent housing for vulnerable people as part of the
zero straw house policy (Djibouti);
145.156 Increase investment in eliminating poverty and reducing the domestic
poverty rate (China);
145.157 Enhance the accessibility of public services to all categories of people,
especially those in vulnerable situations (Azerbaijan);
145.158 Improve the living conditions of the Batwa population through access
to education, health care, decent housing and justice, as well as access to land
(Costa Rica);
145.159 Ensure effective access to health care for all, free from discrimination
(Iceland);
145.160 Implement the International Conference on Population and
Development 25 commitment in order to reduce preventable maternal deaths,
including by ensuring access to sexual and reproductive health services
(Estonia);
145.161 Strengthen the National Health Policy to ensure free health care for
children and pregnant women and continue to work on measures to provide free
health care for retirees (Saudi Arabia);
145.162 Ensure that young people and adolescents have free and unhindered
access to accurate information on sexual and reproductive health (Estonia);
145.163 Continue providing free health care for retirees and their dependents,
and for pregnant mothers until delivery, and strengthening the community
worker system (Ethiopia);
145.164 Strengthen actions to tackle drivers of food insecurity, to end hunger
and to address child malnutrition, including in rural areas (Malaysia);
145.165 Step up efforts to ensure access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation, by addressing the main barriers, investing in quality sanitation
infrastructures and increasing water points in public facilities including schools
and health centres (Malaysia);
145.166 Pursue measures to extend access to universal health coverage and free
health services for the most vulnerable populations, particularly in rural areas,
in accordance with the 2016–2025 national health policy (Djibouti);
145.167 Continue efforts within the framework of the National Health Policy
2016–2025, and adopt a national policy aimed at ensuring universal health
coverage (Mauritania);
145.168 Continue efforts to improve health care for the population, especially
through the implementation of the National Health Policy for the period 2016–
2025 (Tunisia);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 19
145.169 Continue to ensure improvement of the health status of the population
through the National Health Policy 2016–2025 (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea);
145.170 Continue to implement the National Health Policy 2016–2025 to
improve the general health and working conditions of health-care workers
(Oman);
145.171 Continue to allocate greater resources under the National Health
Policy 2016–2025, and ensure continuous improvement in the health-care
infrastructure (Pakistan);
145.172 Accelerate efforts to improve health services, especially in rural areas,
through the effective implementation of national health (Ghana);
145.173 Intensify efforts to finalize the health financing strategy (United
Republic of Tanzania);
145.174 Step up efforts to curb the spread of infectious diseases and reduce
maternal and infant mortality among the internally displaced population, in
accordance with the updated national health development plan and disaster risk
reduction strategy (Philippines);
145.175 Take concrete steps to reduce the high rate of maternal and infant
mortality by improving access to basic prenatal and postnatal care services,
particularly among adolescents, persons living in rural areas and persons with
disabilities (Costa Rica);
145.176 Continue efforts in the strengthening of the health-care system, in
particular prevention of the spread of infectious diseases (Serbia);
145.177 Intensify efforts to improve access to prenatal and postnatal care,
particularly in rural areas and vulnerable populations to reduce maternal and
neonatal mortality (Maldives);
145.178 Continue efforts to strengthen the health-care system, particularly the
maternal and child health-care system (Viet Nam);
145.179 Take measures to improve its health-care infrastructure in order to
enhance access to health care, particularly for women from poor and rural
backgrounds (India);
145.180 Ensure the right to education for all by enhancing access to education
(Sri Lanka);
145.181 Continue national efforts to strengthen access to free basic education
and school supplies for students from families in poverty, as a fundamental
instrument to achieve better quality indicators in the teaching and learning
process (Cuba);
145.182 Continue efforts to provide free-of-charge primary education and
school supplies to students from poor families (Tunisia);
145.183 Continue taking measures to provide free basic education and school
kits for students from poor families (Ethiopia);
145.184 Continue efforts to provide free basic education and school supplies
for children in need (Oman);
145.185 Increase the budget allocated to education, in particular for building
schools’ infrastructure and providing schools with sufficient material and
human resources (South Sudan);
145.186 Increase the budget allocation for education, building school
infrastructure and providing schools with sufficient material and human
resources (Zambia);
A/HRC/54/11
20 GE.23-10727
145.187 Use all its capacities to increase the budget for the education and
health-care sectors, particularly with an emphasis on facilitating women’s and
girls’ access to education and health care (Islamic Republic of Iran);
145.188 Take further steps in the field of education to address the challenges
relating to lack of materials and insufficient budget support (Azerbaijan);
145.189 Continue implementing measures to address the challenges in the
education sector (United Republic of Tanzania);
145.190 Continue efforts to address challenges in the field of education and to
adopt positive measures to tackle the issues of high school-dropout rates among
young people and low rates of secondary school completion among girls
(Malaysia);
145.191 Revise articles 27, 35, 37, 70 and 71 of ministerial order No. 60/1078 on
the harmonization of school regulations, so as to encourage pregnant girls to stay
in school as long as they wish and to ensure reintegration as soon as they feel able
(Kingdom of the Netherlands);
145.192 Put in place measures to ensure equal access to education for all
children, including girls (Gambia);
145.193 Continue implementing measures to provide quality education for
children, especially from the most marginalized groups (Pakistan);
145.194 Redouble efforts to address challenges in education to ensure
meaningful schooling for all children (Congo);
145.195 Strengthen relevant mechanisms to ensure that children in vulnerable
situations, including those internally displaced, have equal access to quality
education and basic health services (Philippines);
145.196 Continue action to promote the schooling of girls, in order to guarantee
their access to education (Greece);
145.197 Continue to promote education cause and protect the right to
education for vulnerable groups such as girls and children with disabilities
(China);
145.198 Put in place action policies in favour of the education of girls, in order
to guarantee gender equality and contribute to the development of the latter
(Mauritius);
145.199 Guarantee the access to education of pregnant girls and their
unconditional reintegration into school after childbirth (Iceland);
145.200 Strengthen measures allowing access to contraceptive methods and
condoms in educational institutions (Belgium);
145.201 Implement comprehensive sexuality education inside and outside of
school settings (Iceland);
145.202 Invest in projects to mitigate and reduce deforestation and soil erosion
to prevent the destruction of the environment (Maldives);
145.203 Strengthen efforts to mitigate the impacts of climate change while
implementing effective measures to reintegrate the victims of natural disasters
(Nepal);
145.204 Continue developing and drawing up plans to counteract the negative
effects of climate change (Plurinational State of Bolivia);
145.205 Continue its commendable efforts to improve the environment and
ensure the well-being of the people (Viet Nam);
145.206 Consolidate measures to combat climate change, in particular through
the implementation of prevention and resilience systems intended for the
populations most at risk (Morocco);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 21
145.207 Step up efforts to protect the rights of citizens from the effects of
climate change (Serbia);
145.208 Finalize the new national strategy for the socioeconomic reintegration
of disaster victims (Türkiye);
145.209 Finalize national legislative reforms to harmonize laws with the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(Senegal);
145.210 Harmonize internal regulations with the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and ensure their
proper implementation (Paraguay);
145.211 Harmonize laws with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, and ensure their application (Chad);
145.212 Continue efforts to harmonize its legislation with the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Plurinational
State of Bolivia);
145.213 Accelerate the reforms of national legislation to harmonize all laws
with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and ensure their correct implementation (Argentina);
145.214 Strengthen efforts to remove the obstacles to women’s empowerment,
under the National Programme for Women’s Economic Empowerment 2021–
2027 (Pakistan);
145.215 Continue awareness-raising campaigns on women’s leadership, and
adopt reforms to promote women’s participation in decision-making bodies
(Ghana);
145.216 Continue awareness-raising campaigns on women’s leadership and
adopting reforms to promote women’s participation in decision-making bodies
and economic activities (Indonesia);
145.217 Continue its efforts to promote the economic, social and cultural rights
of the most vulnerable persons such as women, children and persons with
disabilities (Algeria);
145.218 Continue efforts to improve the rights of women in the social, cultural,
economic and political spheres (Sri Lanka);
145.219 Take all necessary measures to increase the representation of women
in decision-making bodies and State institutions (Malawi);
145.220 Strengthen measures towards removing structural and legal barriers
to women’s participation in politics and decision-making processes (South
Africa);
145.221 Ensure equitable participation of women in decision-making bodies
(Mozambique);
145.222 Continue to implement policies to promote the participation of women
in decision-making at both the national and local levels (Lithuania);
145.223 Continue to implement policies to promote the full and equal
participation of women in decision-making (Greece);
145.224 Continue to implement the national programme for women’s
economic empowerment (Syrian Arab Republic);
145.225 Implement policies to empower women, particularly women and girls
with disabilities or albinism (Colombia);
145.226 Step up its efforts to implement policies and programmes to promote
the full and equal participation of women in economic development (Kenya);
A/HRC/54/11
22 GE.23-10727
145.227 Take steps to promote the funding of grass-roots organizations that
can increase women’s participation in social and economic, political and public
life (Honduras);
145.228 Continue to focus on improving the social and cultural status of women
in the family and society (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea);
145.229 Fight against all forms of violence against women (Congo);
145.230 Continue efforts to combat violence against women (Egypt);
145.231 Strengthen measures aimed at addressing violence against women
(Azerbaijan);
145.232 Continue efforts to combat gender-based violence against women and
to promote gender equality (Ghana);
145.233 Continue with efforts to combat gender-based violence (Malawi);
145.234 Continue its efforts to combat discriminatory practices against women
and girls, including gender-based violence (India);
145.235 Redouble efforts to combat all forms of violence and discrimination
against women and girls, strengthen legal proceedings and combat impunity
(Romania);
145.236 Give continuity to the actions developed for the implementation of the
National Strategy to Combat Gender-based Violence (Cuba);
145.237 Adopt the necessary measures to confront violence against women and
girls, and guarantee all their rights and their sexual and reproductive health
(Costa Rica);
145.238 Strengthen the measures to address all forms of gender-based violence
(Mozambique);
145.239 Strengthen the legislative and regulatory framework to guarantee
better protection of women against gender-based discrimination and violence,
including sexual violence (Benin);
145.240 Pursue reforms by taking meaningful measures, notably to implement
the 2016 Act to protect victims, and combat and prevent sexual and gender-based
violence (Gabon);
145.241 Strengthen the legal framework and judicial services to adequately
prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence, fight impunity and
bring justice to survivors (Italy);
145.242 Prevent and respond to gender-based violence, including conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence and improve access to legal aid for
victims and survivors in order to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice
(Liechtenstein);
145.243 Ensure that perpetrators of violence against women are punished and
that all victims of violence have equal access to legal aid, shelters and care
services (Poland);
145.244 Eliminate all forms of violence against women, young women and girls,
including the establishment of shelters with comprehensive care for victims of
sexual and gender-based violence (Mexico);
145.245 Amend the 2016 law on victim protection and the prevention and
punishment of gender-based violence (Poland);
145.246 Modify the 2016 law on the protection, prevention and repression of
gender-based violence to offer effective reparation to the victims of this concern
(Uruguay);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 23
145.247 Amend the law on victim protection and the prevention and
punishment of gender-based violence and harmonize it with the Penal Code
(Zambia);
145.248 Establish a national legal aid programme for the most vulnerable
populations, especially women and girl victims of violence (Afghanistan);
145.249 Ensure that allegations of violence against women are thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators are brought to justice (Slovenia);
145.250 Take concrete and effective measures to prevent gender-based
violence, and ensure that allegations of violence against women, including
domestic violence, are thoroughly investigated and perpetrators brought to
justice (Norway);
145.251 Ensure that allegations of violence against women are thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators are brought to justice (Afghanistan);
145.252 Equip, increase and make accessible care centres for victims of gender-
based violence, and promote the reintegration and resettlement of victims to
make them independent (Burkina Faso);
145.253 Decriminalize abortion, and legalize it in cases of rape, incest and fetal
impairment (Iceland);
145.254 Intensify efforts to promote and protect children’s rights (Egypt);
145.255 Support efforts to promote and protect children’s rights, especially
those related to education and health (Libya);
145.256 Strengthen the implementation of the national strategy to combat the
phenomenon of children in street situations and to promote their integration in
families (Burkina Faso);
145.257 Accelerate the legislative review process on child protection and
incorporate provisions aimed at ending corporal punishment in all
circumstances, including in the family environment (Romania);
145.258 Continue to work on the National Child Protection Policy and take
more measures to protect and promote children’s rights, as well as work to
combat the phenomenon of street children and ensure their reintegration into
society (Saudi Arabia);
145.259 Continue efforts to protect vulnerable groups, especially women and
children (Sudan);
145.260 Take concrete measures to reduce the maternal and infant mortality
rates, improving access to basic prenatal and postnatal care and emergency
obstetric services (Portugal);
145.261 Strengthen the legal framework and put in place measures to enable
the elimination of early child marriages (Uganda);
145.262 An absolute ban on the employment of children below the minimum
age established by the Labour Code (Zambia);
145.263 Continue the progress made in the promotion of the rights of women,
girls and children (Cameroon);
145.264 Continue to implement the National Policy on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities 2020–2024 (Oman);
145.265 Continue taking effective measures to protect the rights of persons
with disabilities, in particular through ensuring the effective implementation of
the Act on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(Islamic Republic of Iran);
145.266 Continue to strengthen its efforts to ensure that persons with
disabilities can participate meaningfully in its society (Singapore);
A/HRC/54/11
24 GE.23-10727
145.267 Ensure that the rights of vulnerable groups of population, in particular
women, children, persons with disabilities, the elderly as well as ethnic
minorities, are protected in law and in practice (Russian Federation);
145.268 Continue striving to provide appropriate educational materials for
children with disabilities and those with special needs (Kuwait);
145.269 Develop a clear and specific policy to protect people with albinism and
integrate them into social and economic life (Kuwait);
145.270 Continue the efforts of integration and access to health care and
education of Indigenous Peoples, persons with albinism and persons with
disabilities (Cameroon);
145.271 Enhance reforms to promote and protect the right to work and the
right to just and favourable conditions of work for women, persons with
disabilities, and other vulnerable groups (South Africa);
145.272 Decriminalize homosexuality and take necessary steps to abolish
discriminatory practices based on sexual orientation and gender identity
(Finland);
145.273 Decriminalize same-sex relations between consenting adults (Iceland);
145.274 Decriminalize same-sex relations, and adopt a strategy for the
inclusion and non-discrimination of LGBTI+ persons (Mexico);
145.275 Decriminalize consensual relations between same-sex adults and
protect victims of violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity
(Spain);
145.276 Repeal article 590 of Law No. 1/27 of 29 December 2017, thereby
decriminalizing sexual relations between adults of the same sex (Kingdom of the
Netherlands);
145.277 Repeal article 590 of Law No. 1/27 that criminalizes sexual relations
between adults of the same sex (Chile);
145.278 Repeal laws criminalizing consensual same-sex relations between
adults (Australia);
145.279 Repeal laws that criminalize consensual same-sex sexual relations
(Canada);
145.280 Repeal the regulatory framework and administrative acts that
penalize, restrict and stigmatize relationships between people of the same sex
and/or gender (Argentina);
145.281 Repeal all legal provisions that discriminate against LGBTQI+
persons, including in the right to education (Iceland);
145.282 Take all necessary administrative and institutional measures to
effectively protect LGBTIQ persons against attacks on their human integrity and
against discrimination of all kinds, including in access to health-care services
(Malta);
145.283 Take necessary measures aimed at the eradication of discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity (Ukraine);
145.284 Continue to strengthen measures to promote the return and
sustainable reintegration of refugees (Kenya);
145.285 Sustain the momentum in the voluntary return of refugees through
active policies and awareness-raising programmes (Türkiye);
145.286 Continue to put in place measures and policies that ensure the safety
and protection of returning refugees, especially from the neighbouring countries
(Uganda);
A/HRC/54/11
GE.23-10727 25
145.287 Strengthen measures promoting the return and sustainable
reintegration of refugees (Chad).
146. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/54/11
26 GE.23-10727
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Burundi was headed by S.E Madame Imelde SABUSHIMIIKE,
Ministre de la Solidarité Nationale, des Affaires Sociales, des Droits de la Personne Humaine
et du Genre and composed of the following members:
• S.E. Madame Domine BANYANKIMBONA, Ministre de la Justice ;
• Ambassadeur Elisa NKERABIRORI ;
• Général Major de Police Christophe MANIRAMBONA, Inspecteur Général Adjoint
de la Police Nationale du Burundi ;
• M. Théoneste NIYONGABIRE, Substitut du Procureur Général de la République du
Burundi ;
• M. Désiré HARIMESHI, Directeur Général des Droits de la Personne Humaine, de
l’Education à la Paix et à la Réconciliation Nationale ;
• M. Joseph NDAYISENGA, Directeur Général de la Solidarité Nationale et de
l’Assistance Sociale ;
• Madame Donatienne GIRUKWISHAKA, Directrice Générale de la Promotion de la
Femme et de l’Egalité de Genre ;
• Madame Claphe-Christine NTUNZWENIMANA, Directeur des Organes de Traités,
Procédures Spéciales et Examen Périodique Universel des Nations Unies et Autres
mécanismes ;
• Madame Emmeline MUSHIRANZIGO, Conseillère du Ministre de la Justice ;
• M. Michel NYABENDA, Coordonnateur du Projet d’Appui aux Filets ;
• Sociaux, Productifs et employabilité des Jeunes ;
• M. Jean Bosco NDINDURUVUGO, Premier Conseiller à la Mission Permanente du
Burundi ;
• M. Pacifique NITUNGA, Attaché juridique à la Mission Permanente du Burundi ;
• Madame Justine SIOMANA, Deuxième Conseiller à la Mission Permanente du
Burundi.
