GE.24-09776 (E) 080724 080724
Human Rights Council
Fifty-seventh session
9 September–9 October 2024
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Cyprus
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/57/15
General Assembly Distr.: General
8 July 2024
Original: English
A/HRC/57/15
2 GE.24-09776
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its forty-sixth session from 29 April to
10 May 2024. The review of Cyprus was held at the 4th meeting, on 30 April 2024. The
delegation of Cyprus was headed by the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Andreas Kakouris. At its 10th meeting, held on 3 May 2024, the Working Group adopted the
report on Cyprus.
2. On 10 January 2024, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cyprus: Georgia, Qatar and Somalia.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1
and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Cyprus:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Azerbaijan, Germany, Portugal, on behalf
of the Group of Friends on national mechanisms for implementation, reporting and follow-up,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America was transmitted to Cyprus through the troika. These questions
are available on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Cyprus reiterated the commitment of the Government of Cyprus to
the universal periodic review process. It stressed that the main impediment to ensuring the
effective protection and promotion of human rights in Cyprus remained the 50-year-long de
facto division of the country. People of Cyprus living on both sides of the ceasefire line
continued to suffer gross human rights violations caused by the 1974 military invasion and
continuing military occupation of more than one third of the territory of Cyprus. The
Government of Cyprus was not in a position to apply and consequently ensure the
implementation of human rights in the whole of its territory. Thus, the information on policies
and the data provided by the Government referred solely to the areas in which the
Government exercised full and effective control.
6. Cyprus remained steadfast in its long-standing commitment to protecting and
promoting human rights. Cyprus had acceded to the core United Nations human rights treaties
and European human rights-related instruments and was committed to continuing the process
of examining and acceding to further instruments. Since 2001, Cyprus had extended an open
invitation to all special procedure mandate holders. In 2022, it had received a visit from
members of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances.
7. Since its previous review, in 2019, Cyprus had continued to improve its human rights
standards by strengthening its institutional framework, reinforcing its legislative context and
policy initiatives and enhancing the implementation of universal periodic review
recommendations.
1 A/HRC/WG.6/46/CYP/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/46/CYP/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/46/CYP/3.
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 3
8. In 2021, the Government had established the Deputy Ministry for Social Welfare,
which was mandated, inter alia, to expand support for persons in vulnerable situations. In
2022, the Cyprus Commissioner for Administration and the Protection of Human Rights was
reaccredited as the country’s national human rights institution, with A status, signifying its
full compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles).
9. Cyprus continued to have the highest number of first-time applicants for international
protection per capita of any State member of the European Union. Cyprus provided enhanced
assistance to asylum-seekers and, following the introduction of new legislation in 2020,
applications were now examined expeditiously. The rights of asylum-seekers to access
health-care facilities and the labour market were guaranteed. Asylum-seekers were provided
with financial assistance to cover basic needs and minor personal expenses. Cyprus was
constantly upgrading its measures to enhance living conditions and ensure accommodation
in first reception centres for as many persons as possible.
10. Combating all forms of discrimination was a key policy objective for Cyprus. Over
the previous year, there had been a vigorous attempt to safeguard equitable access to quality
education and to health-care services, regardless of nationality or legal status.
11. Cyprus had enacted the Law on the Prevention and Combating of Violence against
Women and Domestic Violence and Related Matters in 2021. Among other elements, the law
recognized femicide as a specific offence and as an aggravating factor in sentencing. A
national coordinating body had been established, and its first national strategy, for
2023-2028, had been launched. In 2020, Cyprus had passed a law criminalizing sexual and
gender-based online harassment. Moreover, in 2020, the Women’s House had been
established as a crisis centre to provide support to women who were victims of violence and
their children, without discrimination and irrespective of their legal status.
12. In January 2024, all ministers, deputy ministers and commissioners had signed a
declaration to take a zero-tolerance approach in response to any incident involving sexist
behaviour and sexual harassment in the workplace, thus providing the political impetus to
eliminate any form of gender discrimination.
13. Cyprus had placed women’s rights and gender equality high among its priorities. More
women now occupied senior political posts, while the integration of gender issues remained
prominent in public policy planning. In that context, the new Strategy on Equality between
Women and Men, for 2024–2026, was now in effect. Closing the gender pay gap was an
indispensable element of achieving gender equality. The gender pay gap in Cyprus continued
to follow a downward trend.
14. To further ensure the rights of the child, Cyprus was working towards establishing a
second children’s house. The first children’s house had been established in 2017, with a
mandate to provide support services to children who were victims of sexual abuse and sexual
exploitation. Addressing juvenile delinquency while protecting the rights of the child was a
policy area in which Cyprus has made targeted efforts during the reporting period. More
specifically, the 2021 legislation on children in conflict with the law provided for the
establishment of a criminal justice system friendly to children in conflict with the law.
15. Regarding trafficking in persons, in 2019, the relevant legislation had been amended
in order to provide for stricter penalties for perpetrators of trafficking in persons for purposes
of sexual or labour exploitation. In June 2023, a court had handed down the first ever
conviction for receiving sexual services from a trafficked victim, in a milestone for
combating trafficking. All victims of trafficking in persons received immediate support and
assistance, including accommodation and financial, psychological and social support.
Training for all stakeholders and awareness-raising were high among the country’s priorities.
16. To further protect the rights of LGBTQI persons, the Government was preparing its
first ever dedicated national strategy, due to be adopted in 2024. On legal gender recognition,
a bill was currently before the parliament. A law banning any form of conversion “therapy”
aimed at changing or suppressing a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression had been passed in 2023.
A/HRC/57/15
4 GE.24-09776
17. The national minimum wage had been introduced in 2023 and had been increased in
2024. That development had significantly benefited a considerable number of workers on
low incomes.
18. Cyprus was firmly committed to supporting human rights defenders, protecting an
open civic space and promoting the participation of civil society in a meaningful and
inclusive manner. Cyprus was engaged in cooperating with civil society in a number of
human rights policy areas, including trafficking in persons.
19. Strategies and action plans were in effect in a number of policy areas, including the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, persons with disabilities, the employment of foreign workers, safety and health at
work, the integration of migrants, combating antisemitism, and anti-corruption.
20. Building on its commitments, Cyprus had presented its first ever candidature to
become a member of the Human Rights Council, for the period 2025–2027, which had served
as a demonstration of its advocacy in favour of defending and promoting human rights.
Despite its size, Cyprus aimed to be actively engaged with all States Members of the United
Nations, OHCHR, the Council’s procedures and mechanisms, and civil society. As a
candidate for membership of the Council, Cyprus had set priorities covering an array of
policy areas, including: (a) gender equality; (b) combating violence and discrimination
against women and girls; (c) enhancing unhindered access to quality education for all,
including children with disabilities and children with a migrant background; and
(d) promoting economic, social and cultural rights.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
21. During the interactive dialogue, 89 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
22. Spain welcomed the progress made on gender equality, including the establishment
of the police unit on social awareness and the adoption of the Strategy on Equality between
Women and Men.
23. Sri Lanka commended Cyprus on the progress made in the protection of human rights
since the previous cycle of the universal periodic review.
24. Switzerland made recommendations.
25. Togo made recommendations.
26. Türkiye stated that Turkish Cypriots were one of two equal parties in Cyprus and that
the isolation imposed on Turkish Cypriots was a major human rights violation. It expressed
concern at the persistence of restrictions in the areas of trade, sports, travel and
communications and the denial of the right of Turkish Cypriots to representation in
international forums.
27. Cyprus, raising a point of order, stated that the universal periodic review mechanism
was aimed at discussing and improving the human rights situation of States Members of the
United Nations. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review was meeting to
review developments relating to the human rights situation in Cyprus. According to
established practice and the rules of procedure, issues of a bilateral political and territorial
nature should be kept out of the deliberations in the Working Group. Cyprus stressed that the
remarks made by Türkiye were not relevant to the subject under discussion and urged the
Vice-President of the Human Rights Council to call the delegation of Türkiye to order and
remind it of the need to refrain from politicizing the process. Cyprus stated that it was
imperative that all States Members of the United Nations be addressed by their official names
and that any erroneous references, including the use of non-United Nations terminology, be
omitted from the report of the Working Group.
28. The Vice-President of the Human Rights Council stated that it was appropriate for all
States Members of the United Nations to make comments and observations and voice their
opinions on human rights issues as part of their statements. The Vice-President stressed that
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 5
neither the Human Rights Council nor its universal periodic review mechanism was the
competent body to deal with bilateral issues of a purely political or territorial nature. All
speakers should respect other views and uphold United Nations standards and proper
terminology when referring to countries and territories.
29. Türkiye stated that there was no Turkish school in Limassol, that only four mosques
were open during working hours and that attacks against Turkish Cypriots visiting the south
were on the rise. It stated that the 1974 peace operation in Cyprus had been carried out with
the aim of preventing the island’s annexation to Greece within the framework of the
1960 Treaty of Guarantee.
30. Ukraine welcomed the adoption of the national action plan on women and peace and
security and the efforts made to close the gender wage gap, achieve gender equality and
ensure access to quality education for all.
31. The United Arab Emirates noted the efforts made to advance economic, social and
cultural rights and to ensure cooperation among religious leaders.
32. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland commended Cyprus on
the progress made on women’s rights and the steps taken to tackle corruption, including the
adoption of an updated legal framework.
33. The United Republic of Tanzania commended Cyprus on implementation of the
recommendations from the previous review, despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic.
34. The United States of America commended Cyprus on its anti-trafficking efforts but
was concerned about the rise in crimes involving violence or the threat of violence against
members of national and ethnic minorities, including asylum-seekers.
35. Uruguay welcomed the progress made in the fight against discrimination and violence
against women and in the promotion of specific measures to achieve effective gender
equality.
36. Vanuatu noted the approach taken to facilitate access to health care for persons with
disabilities and the efforts made to strengthen multicultural communication.
37. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed the measures taken to fight against
racism and the adoption of the National Roma Strategic Framework and the Strategy on
Equality between Women and Men.
38. Viet Nam noted the achievements made in implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals and welcomed the adoption of the Strategy on Equality between Women
and Men.
39. Albania expressed appreciation for the ratification of human rights treaties and the
measures taken to promote the rights of women but noted that more needed to be done in that
regard.
40. Algeria welcomed the cooperation of Cyprus with international human rights
mechanisms and the measures taken to protect migrants, combat discrimination and ensure
equality.
41. Argentina welcomed the adoption of the Law on the Prevention and Combating of
Violence against Women and Domestic Violence and Related Matters.
42. Armenia noted the reaccreditation of the national human rights institution, the
adoption of the national strategy on women and the promotion of diversity and
multiculturalism.
43. Australia welcomed the adoption of whistle-blowing legislation, the creation of an
independent authority to combat corruption and the efforts made to safeguard the rights of
LGBTQIA+ people.
44. Azerbaijan condemned the assaults and harassment against Turkish Cypriots and the
absence of effective redress mechanisms for victims of racist or discriminatory treatment.
A/HRC/57/15
6 GE.24-09776
45. Bahrain noted the development of the legal and human rights system in Cyprus since
the previous review.
46. Belarus made recommendations.
47. Bhutan noted the measures taken to promote the rights of women, the adoption of the
renewed national action plan against trafficking in human beings and the creation of the
national referral mechanism for victims.
48. Botswana expressed the hope that the revised National Strategy for Disability and the
National Disability Action Plan would strengthen the protection of human rights.
49. Brazil noted the advancement made in the protection of women’s rights and the
amendment to the Criminal Code that had resulted in the criminalization of conversion
“therapy”.
50. Bulgaria noted the attention paid to women’s empowerment and the rights of children
and persons with disabilities.
51. Burundi welcomed the initiatives on climate change, gender equality and the
prevention of violence against and sexual exploitation of children.
52. Cabo Verde noted the efforts made in the field of human rights, including the
advancement towards gender equality.
53. Cameroon commended Cyprus on its commitment to protecting human rights and the
implementation of the recommendations from the previous review.
54. Canada noted the persistent gender gap, with Cyprus ranked twenty-first among
the 27 States members of the European Union in the 2023 Gender Equality Index.
55. Chile congratulated Cyprus on the adoption of its first national action plan in
compliance with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
56. China welcomed the efforts made to combat hate speech and racial discrimination,
promote gender equality and protect the rights of women, children, and persons with
disabilities.
57. Colombia welcomed the progress made by Cyprus in the area of human rights since
its third review.
58. Costa Rica welcomed the actions taken to reduce the gender gap and encouraged
Cyprus to strengthen measures guaranteeing migrants and refugees the full enjoyment of their
rights.
59. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the adoption of a law to combat racism, discrimination,
xenophobia and hate speech.
60. Cuba welcomed the commitment of Cyprus to the universal periodic review and to
the promotion of human rights for all.
61. The Dominican Republic welcomed the implementation of the new Strategy on
Equality between Women and Men.
62. Egypt noted the efforts made to combat racism and hate speech, empower women and
promote the rights of children and of persons with disabilities.
63. El Salvador welcomed the introduction of the Cyprus National Child Guarantee
Action Plan to prevent social exclusion and child poverty.
64. Estonia welcomed the Strategy on Equality between Women and Men and the
measures taken to address the gender pay gap.
65. Eswatini welcomed the steps taken to prohibit direct or indirect discrimination in
employment, based on race, national origin or religion.
66. France welcomed the efforts made to combat sexist and sexual violence and to protect
the rights of LGBT+ persons, including by prohibiting conversion therapies.
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 7
67. The Gambia praised the commitment of Cyprus to fostering an inclusive society and
the accreditation of the Commissioner for Administration and the Protection of Human
Rights with A status.
68. Georgia commended Cyprus for adopting the Strategy on Equality between Women
and Men, introducing the General Health System, ensuring equal treatment for all and
protecting the rights of persons with disabilities.
69. Germany lauded the determination of Cyprus to revise the criteria for the acquisition
of nationality but noted that there remained scope to strengthen freedom of opinion and
association.
70. Greece welcomed the Code of Conduct against Racism in schools and the recognition
of femicide as a separate criminal offence.
71. Iceland made recommendations.
72. India commended Cyprus on the measures taken to promote the equal participation of
women in public life and the adoption of the Strategy on Equality between Women and Men.
73. The Islamic Republic of Iran stated that there was no policy in place to combat
discrimination, hate crimes and hate speech against minorities.
74. Iraq praised the steps taken to empower women and ensure their participation in public
and political life, to develop the health system and to combat corruption.
75. Ireland welcomed the measures adopted to criminalize femicide and establish an
interministerial committee of gender focal points to mainstream gender policies.
76. Italy commended Cyprus for protecting cultural rights and making efforts to advance
gender equality and combat violence against women.
77. Jordan lauded Cyprus for strengthening the policy framework to combat hate crimes
and for the efforts made to protect the rights of vulnerable persons.
78. Pakistan welcomed the measures taken to strengthen good governance in the
education and health sectors and to combat hate speech, racism and religious intolerance.
79. Kuwait encouraged Cyprus to conduct awareness-raising on reducing the gender pay
gap and attracting more women to scientific professions.
80. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic commended Cyprus on the measures taken to
promote women’s rights, including with regard to equal participation in public and political
life and equal pay.
81. Lebanon welcomed the efforts made to enhance access to social security, combat
harassment in the workplace and fight corruption, gender-based violence, racism and hate
speech.
82. Libya commended Cyprus for supporting the recommendations made during the
previous review and cooperating with the universal periodic review mechanism.
83. Lithuania welcomed the significant steps taken by Cyprus to tackle trafficking in
persons and its active role in facilitating humanitarian aid to Gaza.
84. Luxembourg welcomed the efforts made to implement the recommendations from the
third review cycle.
85. Malawi made recommendations.
86. Malaysia commended Cyprus on its efforts to promote and protect women’s rights,
gender equality and diversity, including the cultural identity of different religious groups.
87. Responding to the questions posed and observations made by States, the delegation
of Cyprus noted that, on 29 February 2024, the House of Representatives had enacted a law
on the establishment of a Deputy Ministry of Migration and International Protection, which
would facilitate effective migration and asylum management. Cyprus had the highest number
of first-time asylum applicants per capita of any State member of the European Union, and
the number of applicants for and beneficiaries of international protection in Cyprus was
A/HRC/57/15
8 GE.24-09776
equivalent to almost 7 per cent of the country’s population. Ninety-five per cent of those
applications had been submitted by migrants who had irregularly entered the areas under the
effective control of the Government by crossing the Green Line. The total number of asylum
applications processed had been approximately 16,000 in 2021, approximately 16,000 in
2022 and more than 20,000 in 2023. The number of migrants arriving by boat had increased
by 355 per cent between 2022 and 2023. From January to April 2024, there had been
2,857 irregular arrivals by sea and 1,183 by land.
88. Cyprus supported human rights defenders, as they constituted an important
component in the collective endeavour to protect human rights and prevent possible
violations. Within that framework, Cyprus maintained a strong, principled position in
condemning any action targeting human rights defenders and civil society, including attacks,
reprisals, harassment and intimidation, both online and offline. Cyprus was committed to
thoroughly investigating any possible attacks against human rights defenders.
89. With regard to gender-based violence, the Cyprus Police had established the
Safeguarding Sub-Directorate, which handled issues of domestic violence, the sexual abuse
of children, missing persons and juvenile offenders, in 2021. Specialized units had been
established in 2020 in all districts of Cyprus to investigate all incidents of domestic violence.
They were staffed by trained police personnel and cooperated with all competent authorities.
90. A statutory minimum wage had been introduced in Cyprus in 2023. In Cyprus, the
minimum wage had increased from €940 to €1,000 in one year. In addition, wages had
increased for 19 different professions in the hospitality industry. There was a new strategy to
protect labour rights and ensure equal treatment between nationals of European Union and
non-European Union countries with regard to the terms and conditions of employment,
compliance with the labour legislation framework and not dismissing workers due to
redundancy in corresponding or similar posts.
91. In 2021, the Ministry of Justice and Public Order had drafted the first National
Strategy for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights, which highlighted a
commitment to upholding human rights and eliminating inequalities and discrimination on
various grounds, such as gender, race or ethnicity, religion or belief, disability, age and sexual
orientation. Circulars, manuals, police standing orders and a code of police ethics had been
issued to uphold professional standards and behaviours and specify the actions necessary for
the effective identification, recording and investigation of racist acts.
92. On 20 December 2023, the Council of Ministers had approved the new strategy
document and national action plan on the prevention and combatting of trafficking in persons
and protection of victims. The Office of Combating Trafficking in Human Beings was staffed
by experienced investigators who had been trained in handling and dealing with victims and
potential victims and investigated all serious cases of trafficking in persons. Moreover, the
Cyprus Police had conducted several cooperative international investigations on trafficking
in persons and participated in research and projects to broaden the knowledge of its
workforce, improve the various processes and practices and enhance cooperation with
European and third country governmental and non-governmental bodies.
93. Prison overcrowding was still considered to be the most challenging problem faced
by the Cyprus Prisons Department. The plan for repairing, reconstructing and expanding
prison facilities was being implemented. Prison capacity would be increased to 240 places
by the end of September 2024 and 360 places by the end of 2027.
94. The vast majority of children with disabilities were educated either in mainstream
classrooms or in special units at their local school. Special emphasis was placed on ensuring
curriculum access through the use of assistive technology and changes to teaching methods
and learning arrangements. In addition, the Ministry ensured that schools had suitable
infrastructure to accommodate the needs of pupils by making various adjustments to increase
accessibility and provide transportation for all children who did not attend the school in their
district. A teacher’s guide had been developed to inform and raise awareness among all
stakeholders about the prevention and effective management of homophobia and transphobia
in education.
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 9
95. The rights of LGBTQI persons were covered in the first National Strategy for the
Protection and Promotion of Human Rights, in effect since 2021. A national strategy focused
specifically on the rights of LGBTQI persons would be adopted in 2024. It would address
issues related to LGBTQI persons in all fields, such as education, employment, health care,
culture and sports, on the basis of the principles and core values of equality, respect and
non-discrimination.
96. A bill on legal gender recognition had been finalized in September 2023 and was
currently before the parliament. In 2019, an administrative process had been established to
allow individuals to change their official documents on the basis of self-determination. In
that way, adult transgender persons could amend their details more easily. A bill had been
passed in 2023 to ban any form of conversion therapy aimed at changing or suppressing a
person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.
97. Maldives commended Cyprus on its efforts to promote gender equality and integrate
gender perspectives into public policies.
98. Malta commended Cyprus on the adoption of the National Strategy and National
Action Plan on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women.
99. Mauritius congratulated Cyprus for introducing the General Health System, which
was aimed at ensuring universal health coverage.
100. Mexico welcomed the prohibition in legislation of conversion practices or therapies,
as well as the adoption of the law on protection against criminal harassment and stalking.
101. Montenegro commended Cyprus on its legislative, institutional and policy advances,
such as those aimed at promoting women’s participation in public life and ensuring
educational quality.
102. Namibia commended Cyprus on the measures taken to ensure the protection and
promotion of human rights.
103. Nepal welcomed the efforts made in promoting women’s rights and combating
trafficking in persons, in particular through the Multidisciplinary Coordinating Group.
104. The Kingdom of the Netherlands commended Cyprus on its efforts to combat violence
against women and girls and urged further implementation of the related national action plan,
while encouraging continued reunification efforts.
105. Nigeria welcomed the commitment made to protecting migrants’ rights and
combating trafficking in persons, including through the implementation of the national action
plan to combat trafficking in persons.
106. Oman expressed appreciation for the development of the Code of Conduct against
Racism and the Guide for Managing and Recording Racist Incidents.
107. Kazakhstan commended Cyprus on its positive measures to promote the equal
participation of women in public and political life and combat gender-based violence.
108. Panama greeted the delegation of Cyprus and expressed appreciation for the
presentation of its national report.
109. Paraguay welcomed the adoption of the National Roma Strategic Framework and the
Strategy on Equality between Women and Men and the progress made in implementing
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
110. The Philippines welcomed the steps taken to mainstream gender equality and combat
violence against women and girls, including the revised strategy for the employment of
foreign workers.
111. Poland commended Cyprus on the adoption of the National Roma Strategic
Framework but was concerned about women’s unemployment and the insufficient access of
vulnerable children to social services and education.
112. Portugal commended Cyprus on its public health campaign to raise awareness of HIV,
including the provision of free testing and counselling services.
A/HRC/57/15
10 GE.24-09776
113. Qatar welcomed the measures taken to promote human rights, including health-care
coverage, plans for persons with disabilities and the establishment of a mediation institution
for family dispute resolution.
114. The Republic of Moldova commended Cyprus on the progress made in advancing
gender equality, including through the approval of the new Strategy on Equality between
Women and Men.
115. Romania commended Cyprus on its efforts to combat racism and discrimination,
including the National Roma Strategic Framework and the Code of Conduct against Racism.
116. The Russian Federation expressed concern over the unequal treatment of refugees and
was alarmed by the unjustified pressure placed by Cyprus on Russian citizens.
117. Saudi Arabia welcomed the three-year strategic plan on promoting equality and
innovation in education.
118. Senegal commended Cyprus on its efforts to protect human rights, including the
adoption of laws, programmes and national strategies to strengthen its legal and institutional
framework.
119. Serbia welcomed the efforts made to facilitate women’s participation in the labour
market and promote equal access to education.
120. Slovakia welcomed the ratification of nearly all the international human rights treaties
and legal instruments for protecting migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers.
121. Slovenia commended Cyprus on the positive steps taken since its third review and
expressed concern regarding the underreporting of cases of violence against women,
including domestic violence.
122. Indonesia commended Cyprus on its efforts to strengthen the protection of human
rights, especially for women, children, persons with disabilities and migrant workers.
123. Morocco commended Cyprus for ratifying international instruments and cooperating
with international mechanisms and institutions.
124. Responding to observations made by States, the delegation stated that Cyprus had
made considerable progress in the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women. As his first political act, the President had appointed women to 11 out of 25 positions
in the Council of Ministers and the wider Government, representing 45 per cent of total
members, as ministers, deputy ministers and commissioners. The gender pay gap had
decreased by 34.6 per cent in the previous decade.
125. Cyprus promoted the full political participation of all Cypriot nationals, including
their rights to vote and to run for public office. All Cypriots, including Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots, needed to apply to be included in the electoral roll in order to have the
same electoral rights. With regard to the European Parliament elections, the law provided for
the automatic inclusion in the electoral list of all citizens, including Turkish Cypriots holding
an identity card issued by Cyprus, who had declared an address in the areas of Cyprus that
were not under the effective control of the Government. More than 90 per cent of Turkish
Cypriots were, as of April 2024, registered in the electoral list to vote in the European
Parliament elections in June 2024.
126. According to the legislation of 2021 on children in conflict with the law, any form of
deprivation of liberty of children should be a measure of last resort and be for the shortest
appropriate period of time. The criminal prosecution and detention of children in conflict
with the law were measures of last resort and were enforced only if all other measures
provided for by law had been tried and had failed. Children were generally not prosecuted.
They were referred to a diversion programme under the guidance of officers of the competent
authorities, such as the police, social welfare services and mental health services. If the crime
committed was deemed to be serious, the Attorney General might decide to prosecute. In
exceptional cases, where children were deprived of their liberty, children were detained
separately, in a special prison unit designed for them.
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 11
127. Regarding pupils with a migrant background, an upgraded policy had been
implemented to ensure their smooth integration, with a focus on five priority areas. The
relevant action plan included a variety of targeted actions based on an intercultural approach
and the teaching of Greek as a second language.
128. In its closing remarks, the delegation of Cyprus stated that the recommendations
would serve as an invaluable tool with which to further accelerate the Government’s work in
protecting and promoting human rights in Cyprus.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
129. The following recommendations will be examined by Cyprus, which will provide
responses in due time, but no later than the fifty-seventh session of the Human Rights
Council:
129.1 Ratify the core United Nations human rights treaties to which it is not
yet a party (Gambia);
129.2 Ratify pending United Nations human rights treaties, in particular the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families, the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Paraguay);
129.3 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina) (Colombia) (Côte d’Ivoire) (Italy)
(Luxembourg);
129.4 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Libya);
129.5 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, signed in 2007 (France);
129.6 Accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Iraq);
129.7 Consider the ratification of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Chile);
129.8 Expedite the consideration of ratifying the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Ukraine);
129.9 Continue the consultations and all necessary procedures towards the
ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Malawi);
129.10 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and establish enforced disappearance as an
autonomous crime in the Criminal Code (Mexico);
129.11 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Portugal);
129.12 Accede to the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons
and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and ratify the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
(Spain);
129.13 Continue taking steps towards the ratification of the Convention
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction
of Statelessness (Uruguay);
129.14 Evaluate the possibility of acceding to the Convention relating to the
Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness
(Argentina);
A/HRC/57/15
12 GE.24-09776
129.15 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Azerbaijan) (Indonesia);
129.16 Sign the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Libya) (Morocco);
129.17 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Cabo
Verde);
129.18 Consider acceding to the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and
accelerate the process of ratifying the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, as well as of the
International Labour Organization (ILO) Domestic Workers Convention, 2011
(No. 189) (Uruguay);
129.19 Accelerate the process of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (El Salvador);
129.20 Ratify the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190)
(El Salvador);
129.21 Accede to the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness
(Luxembourg);
129.22 Ratify and implement the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Slovakia);
129.23 Consider further necessary measures to ensure the protection of the
rights of migrants and refugees, including through the ratification of the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families (Nigeria);
129.24 Ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and
adopt the necessary measures to facilitate the acquisition of nationality for
children who would otherwise be stateless, regardless of the citizenship,
residence, legal status, migration status or marital status of the parents (Mexico);
129.25 Apply legislative provisions relating to nationality without
discrimination by using clearly defined criteria, transparent procedures and
reasonable deadlines, while envisaging the ratification of the Convention relating
to the Status of Stateless Persons (Switzerland);
129.26 Strengthen efforts to ensure that legislation and practices conform
fully with the requirements of article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, including by taking immediate measures to remove undue
restrictions on access to places of worship (Kingdom of the Netherlands);
129.27 Ensure that the Commissioner for Administration and the Protection
of Human Rights fully complies with the Paris Principles (Qatar);
129.28 Establish a national mechanism for the implementation of, reporting
on and follow-up to human rights recommendations, considering the possibility
of receiving cooperation for this purpose (Paraguay);
129.29 Enact laws that effectively prohibit racism and discrimination, and
implement administrative measures aimed at identifying and addressing
discriminatory practices experienced by minorities (Islamic Republic of Iran);
129.30 Strengthen measures to combat discrimination (Senegal);
129.31 Continue combating hatred and racism (Oman);
129.32 Adopt the necessary laws to eliminate discriminatory practices
(Kuwait);
129.33 Continue efforts to combat discrimination and hate crimes (Albania);
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 13
129.34 Undertake efforts to put an end to hate speech, and collect data on hate
speech and its victims (Jordan);
129.35 Take effective measures to prevent and sanction hate speech and to
combat discrimination on the grounds on sexual orientation, age, disability,
ethnic origin and religion (Luxembourg);
129.36 Strengthen the fight against discrimination against minority and
vulnerable groups (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
129.37 Strengthen the system for the promotion of equality, which is currently
channelled mainly through non-governmental organizations (Spain);
129.38 Take further measures to address and eliminate all forms of racial
discrimination, including xenophobia and hate speech, through legislative and
policy interventions (Sri Lanka);
129.39 Take steps to reduce discrimination in employment, housing,
education and access to public services and health care against members of racial
and ethnic minority groups, including Roma, as well as against refugees and
asylum-seekers, persons with disabilities and LGBTQI+ persons (United States
of America);
129.40 Combat hate speech and incitement to discrimination or violence and
strengthen awareness-raising efforts aimed at promoting respect for human
rights and for diversity and at eradicating prejudices on the basis of race,
ethnicity and religion (Azerbaijan);
129.41 Promote affirmative action on the basis of the law prohibiting racism
and discrimination and implement national plans with disaggregated data to
combat hate speech and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, age,
disability, ethnicity and religion (Costa Rica);
129.42 Continue to implement actions under the law prohibiting racism and
discrimination in all their forms and expressions (Cuba);
129.43 Take further steps to promote gender equality, and consider
introducing a statutory gender quota for nominations in the public sector
(Poland);
129.44 Continue persistent efforts to ensure gender equality, including
through steps to further reduce the gender pay gap (Republic of Moldova);
129.45 Sustain its ongoing efforts to reduce the gender pay gap between men
and women (Nigeria);
129.46 Pursue national efforts to improve the equality, inclusion and
participation of Roma in the social and cultural life of the country (Cuba);
129.47 Increase awareness programmes on equality and non-discrimination,
particularly in relation to migrants and refugees (Egypt);
129.48 Continue taking effective measures to address discrimination and
sexual harassment in schools (Greece);
129.49 Ensure that the absolute prohibition of torture is non-derogable and
that acts of torture are not subject to any statute of limitations (Montenegro);
129.50 Consider making the appropriate amendment to criminalize torture
and ill-treatment and ensure the non-application of the statute of limitations for
them (Bahrain);
129.51 Take concrete steps to improve conditions in prisons and places of
detention in accordance with relevant international standards (Russian
Federation);
129.52 Put an end to the practice of putting pressure on Russians under the
pretext of checking their “suspicious” business activities (Russian Federation);
A/HRC/57/15
14 GE.24-09776
129.53 Continue strengthening anti-corruption legislation and enact
regulations and codes of conduct to govern lobbying and decision-making
processes (Greece);
129.54 Continue the full implementation of the law on institutional
modernization and strengthen probity and transparency within law enforcement
and public security forces (Morocco);
129.55 Conduct criminal investigations, in accordance with the principles of
the rule of law, in a speedy, concentrated, holistic and comprehensive manner,
and considerably strengthen the right to a fair and public trial (Germany);
129.56 Continue to support the work of the Committee on Missing Persons
and to ensure that the families of victims acquire full reparation, rehabilitation
and guarantees of non-repetition (Montenegro);
129.57 Enhance human rights education and training for law enforcement on
combating racism, xenophobia and hate, including countering racial profiling
(Philippines);
129.58 Continue to improve training for police officers, prosecutors, judges
and other legal officials on specific knowledge of gender-based violence (Spain);
129.59 Take effective measures to prevent and punish hate speech online and
offline by collecting disaggregated data on this scourge (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela);
129.60 Ensure fair and full consideration of requests by its Muslim
community to renovate and repair functioning mosques and of requests for the
temporary use of alternative mosques during festivals (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland);
129.61 Ensure the full enjoyment of freedom of religion for all communities
and intensify its efforts to bring its legislation and practices into full conformity
with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Costa Rica);
129.62 Ensure freedom of opinion and expression in accordance with the
international obligations of Cyprus (Russian Federation);
129.63 Strengthen the freedom of association of non-governmental
organizations and review registration procedures accordingly (Germany);
129.64 Take effective measures to prevent and punish hate speech online and
offline (Bahrain);
129.65 Legally guarantee the effective protection of journalists and their
sources, and prevent political interference in media work through appropriate
legislative measures (Germany);
129.66 Strengthen measures aiming to remove barriers in law or practice that
prevent people from exercising their right to vote and stand for election
(Colombia);
129.67 Legalize same-sex marriage (Iceland);
129.68 Consider enacting legislation to recognize the marriages of same-sex
couples that have been legally performed abroad (Malta);
129.69 Extend equal adoption rights to all couples, irrespective of their sexual
orientation (Iceland);
129.70 Allow family reunification for persons placed under subsidiary
protection (Kuwait);
129.71 Strengthen support for families to prevent separation, including
through parenting support, prevention and early intervention programmes,
programmes on positive parenting and communication skills and spaces for
family leisure (Kazakhstan);
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 15
129.72 Strengthen policies aimed at supporting and protecting families as the
primary and fundamental unit of society (Qatar);
129.73 Continue efforts to adopt a national plan to combat human trafficking
(Saudi Arabia);
129.74 Continue efforts to combat trafficking in persons (Iraq);
129.75 Redouble efforts to combat trafficking in human beings (Nepal);
129.76 Strengthen coordination with all stakeholders to comprehensively
address gaps to combat trafficking in persons (Sri Lanka);
129.77 Strengthen efforts to prevent, combat and repress human trafficking
by allocating sufficient resources to the actors implementing the national action
plan against human trafficking and by strengthening the resources of the
bicommunal technical committee on crime and criminal matters (Switzerland);
129.78 Continue efforts to prevent, combat, eliminate and repress human
trafficking and to adequately protect victims (Togo);
129.79 Increase its efforts to combat, eradicate and punish trafficking in
persons, paying special attention to women and girls who are victims of this crime
(Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
129.80 Continue its efforts to better protect victims of trafficking (Albania);
129.81 Increase efforts to eliminate the human trafficking of asylum-seekers,
including through cooperation with Turkish Cypriot representatives and the
establishment of best interest procedures for unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children (Australia);
129.82 Increase efforts to address the crime of trafficking in persons,
especially against women and girls, by benefiting from international best
practices, specifically those concerned with prevention, response and reparation
mechanisms (Bahrain);
129.83 Take measures to improve the system to combat trafficking in persons,
especially women and girls, for the purposes of sexual and labour exploitation,
and ensure adequate protection for victims (Belarus);
129.84 Further strengthen its efforts in combating human trafficking through
enhanced capacity-building programmes and specialized training for law
enforcement and other relevant officials (Bhutan);
129.85 Increase its efforts to combat human trafficking, particularly through
the implementation of the 2023–2026 national action plan, providing authorities
with the necessary know-how and assistance to fulfil the rights of trafficking
victims (Brazil);
129.86 Undertake further efforts to combat human trafficking and provide
protection and support to victims, especially women and children (Bulgaria);
129.87 Continue its efforts to combat human trafficking, including efforts to
prosecute offenders (Cabo Verde);
129.88 Maintain efforts to combat trafficking in persons, with special
emphasis on women and girls (Chile);
129.89 Improve its methods and means of identifying trafficking victims,
including by adopting a plan to limit trafficking, and continue its efforts to
prosecute offenders, provide victim services and adopt the most efficient
reporting methods (Islamic Republic of Iran);
129.90 Ensure full and effective implementation of the national anti-
trafficking action plan 2023–2024, including the provision of legal assistance to
victims of trafficking, and capacities and resources to investigate potential cases
(Ireland);
A/HRC/57/15
16 GE.24-09776
129.91 Continue efforts to combat trafficking while prohibiting such acts and
providing compensation to victims (Jordan);
129.92 Further improve capabilities to identify victims of human trafficking
and potential victims, including by strengthening officer training (Lithuania);
129.93 Take further steps to combat the prevalence of trafficking in persons
through full and effective implementation of the 2023–2026 national action plan
(Namibia);
129.94 Continue its efforts to prevent and combat human trafficking
(Nigeria);
129.95 Bolster measures against the trafficking of women and girls for sexual
and labour exploitation by improving mechanisms for the early detection of
potential victims, especially among migrants and asylum-seekers, among others
(Philippines);
129.96 Continue its efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings
and provide protection for victims (Portugal);
129.97 Further strengthen efforts to combat, prevent, eradicate and punish
trafficking in persons and ensure the adequate protection of victims (Romania);
129.98 Abrogate legal provisions, including in the Civil Code, that
discriminate against women and prohibit their access to certain kinds of
employment (Cameroon);
129.99 Take further measures to facilitate the participation of women in the
labour market (Greece);
129.100 Step up efforts to promote gender equality in the labour market by
reducing the gender wage gap and the female unemployment rate (Panama);
129.101 Continue to take steps to improve the working conditions, safety and
health of all workers, including migrant workers (Nepal);
129.102 Adopt and implement the mechanism to guarantee the same legal
protection to domestic workers as to other residents of Cyprus (Slovakia);
129.103 Allocate sufficient human, financial and technical resources to social
protection services to strengthen their prevention and intervention capacities in
contexts of family separation, at the national and local levels (Togo);
129.104 Further ensure access to affordable health care (India);
129.105 Adopt further measures to sustain and reinforce progress made in
access to health-care systems, especially for persons in vulnerable situations
(Viet Nam);
129.106 Guarantee effective sexual and reproductive health rights, notably
access to the right to voluntary interruption of pregnancy in all circumstances
(France);
129.107 Ensure access to affordable and timely health services for all minors,
regardless of their national origin and personal, ethnic or religious
characteristics (Costa Rica);
129.108 Strengthen efforts to guarantee equal access to health care and social
welfare services for all, without discrimination (Indonesia);
129.109 Consider continuing efforts to ensure equal access for all children to
education while promoting tolerance and respect in education policy (Armenia);
129.110 Continue its efforts to promote inclusive education for all (Mauritius);
129.111 Step up efforts to ensure good education for all children, especially
children with disabilities (Qatar);
129.112 Continue ensuring high-quality education for all children (Oman);
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 17
129.113 Promote equal rights to education for children, especially children
with disabilities, and eliminate any form of discrimination (China);
129.114 Continue actions aimed at advancing awareness of and education on
human rights, at all levels of the administration and in concerned bodies
(Burundi);
129.115 Continue efforts to improve enrolment in education, especially at the
preschool level, and explicitly define the number of years of education in primary
and secondary education (Dominican Republic);
129.116 Continue to increase enrolment in education, particularly at the
pre-primary level, and strengthen human rights education (Maldives);
129.117 Continue to improve enrolment in education, especially at the
pre-primary level (Kazakhstan);
129.118 Continue strengthening its efforts for accelerating the implementation
of its environmental obligations and international commitments, as well as
raising awareness of the importance of cultural rights and cultural heritage in
all its diversity (United Republic of Tanzania);
129.119 Take further measures to promote cultural rights, protect cultural
heritage and actively participate in relevant international dialogue and
cooperation (China);
129.120 Expand its efforts to safeguard and celebrate Cyprus’s rich cultural
diversity while fostering inclusivity for all, including those with visual
impairments (Vanuatu);
129.121 Undertake the full, effective and timely implementation of the National
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan to address all challenges associated with
nature and biodiversity loss (Malaysia);
129.122 Engage actively with the international community in endeavours to
promote and protect human rights within the context of climate change (Viet
Nam);
129.123 Take measures to prevent unilateral coercive measures that have a
significant negative impact on the exercise of human rights (Belarus);
129.124 Enhance international cooperation for the promotion of the rights of
women and children (Pakistan);
129.125 Continue to strengthen its efforts in compliance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) (El Salvador);
129.126 Take more measures to eliminate discrimination against women
(Saudi Arabia);
129.127 Pursue the consistent implementation of gender-inclusive policies
(Ukraine);
129.128 Continue its tremendous efforts in empowering women and ensure
women’s meaningful participation in public life and in the labour market (United
Arab Emirates);
129.129 Continue efforts towards the greater participation of women in
decision-making processes (Albania);
129.130 Implement measures to ensure the meaningful participation of women
in the peace process, including in key negotiation roles (Australia);
129.131 Bridge the disparity in the participation rate of women compared to
men in leadership positions (Bahrain);
129.132 Continue the implementation of policies and comprehensive measures
to promote the equal participation of women in the public, political, social and
economic spheres (Bulgaria);
A/HRC/57/15
18 GE.24-09776
129.133 Take targeted measures to promote a greater gender balance in
government decision-making at all levels (Canada);
129.134 Strengthen intercommunal dialogue mechanisms and increase the
participation of women in senior negotiator roles (Canada);
129.135 Make tangible steps to strengthen the representation of women in
decision-making and leadership positions at all levels in the public and private
sectors (Estonia);
129.136 Intensify efforts to promote equality between men and women in all
spheres of life and society (Eswatini);
129.137 Take further steps to eliminate the obstacles in law and in practice
preventing women from pursuing election or being elected to public positions
(Eswatini);
129.138 Continue to implement gender equality policies in all areas, including
to promote women’s greater participation in political life and decision-making
bodies (France);
129.139 Continue its commitment to increasing and promoting the
participation of women in public and political life (Italy);
129.140 Strengthen efforts to fully implement the national Strategy on Equality
between Women and Men 2024–2026 (Lao People’s Democratic Republic);
129.141 Continue efforts to address the multiple forms of discrimination
against women in vulnerable situations, including through the full
implementation of existing legal frameworks (Lebanon);
129.142 Intensify efforts to promote equality between men and women in all
spheres of society and life, in particular by taking measures to increase the
representation of women in decision-making positions (Colombia);
129.143 Continue to promote and introduce positive measures in relation to
women’s equal participation, ensuring gender equality in public and political life
(Cuba);
129.144 Redouble efforts to increase women’s representation in
decision-making positions throughout the public and private sectors and to
reduce the gender pay gap (Luxembourg);
129.145 Pursue its progress in promoting women’s rights and eliminating
gender-based violence (Mauritius);
129.146 Intensify efforts to bring about equality between men and women in
all spheres of society, including in decision-making positions (Namibia);
129.147 Continue to involve more women and young people in public and
political life and in the process of rapprochement between the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities (Slovakia);
129.148 Effectively implement the 2024–2026 Strategy on Equality between
Women and Men to further advance and mainstream gender equality across
sectors of life (Indonesia);
129.149 Allocate sufficient resources for the implementation of the national
strategy on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic
violence(Switzerland);
129.150 Continue its efforts to eliminate violence against women and
implement the National Strategy and National Action Plan (2023–2028) on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women (United Arab Emirates);
129.151 Take further steps to tackle the rise of domestic violence, violence
against women and sexual assault, including through the consistent and adequate
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 19
investigation of sexual harassment complaints (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland);
129.152 Continue taking measures to eliminate discrimination and violence
against women (Armenia);
129.153 Continue its efforts in combating gender-based violence through the
effective implementation of the Strategy on Equality between Women and Men
(2024–2026) and the National Action Plan (2023–2028) on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women (Bhutan);
129.154 Step up efforts to curb gender-based violence, in particular by taking
the measures necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the National
Strategy and National Action Plan (2023–2028) on Preventing and Combating
Violence against Women (Botswana);
129.155 Ensure the effective application of the National Strategy and National
Action Plan on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women, in the face
of cases of violence against women (Chile);
129.156 Take all necessary measures, including by providing sufficient
funding, to ensure the effective implementation of the National Strategy and
National Action Plan on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
(Estonia);
129.157 Proceed with efforts aimed at preventing and combating violence
against women (Georgia);
129.158 Ensure the effective implementation of the new National Strategy and
National Action Plan on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
(Iceland);
129.159 Redouble efforts to ensure that gender-based violence cases are
thoroughly investigated and that perpetrators are held to account (Iceland);
129.160 Continue to make progress on the eradication of violence against
women in the country (Lao People’s Democratic Republic);
129.161 Continue efforts to end gender-based violence and domestic violence
(Malawi);
129.162 Combat violence against women and domestic violence by providing
adequate technical, human and financial resources to the proposed structure of
the national coordinating body (Malaysia);
129.163 Sustain efforts to combat gender-based violence and ensure access to
justice for the victims (Nepal);
129.164 Establish a database to collect disaggregated data on all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as related court cases (Panama);
129.165 Step up efforts to curb gender-based violence by adopting all necessary
measures for the effective implementation of the National Strategy and National
Action Plan on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women (Paraguay);
129.166 Continue efforts in preventing gender-based violence by providing
extensive training and awareness-raising on women’s rights and gender-based
violence to all relevant stakeholders (Romania);
129.167 Ensure the allocation of sufficient resources to tackle gender-based
and domestic violence while protecting victims’ rights (Indonesia);
129.168 Continue to take steps to uphold the rights to health and education of
children from vulnerable segments in Cyprus, in particular children with
disabilities, those belonging to minorities and those from socioeconomically
disadvantaged families (Sri Lanka);
A/HRC/57/15
20 GE.24-09776
129.169 Continue to promote concrete measures to guarantee the
comprehensive protection of children and adolescents, especially in early
childhood (El Salvador);
129.170 Strengthen child protection legislation and policy to ensure that
children in situations of vulnerability, including Roma children, children with
disabilities and refugee and migrant children, have access to health care, social
services and inclusive education (Poland);
129.171 Intensify efforts to ensure the promotion and protection of children’s
rights (Argentina);
129.172 Further enhance children’s protection, especially against sexual abuse
and exploitation, and ensure better access for children with disabilities to
education (Lebanon);
129.173 Adopt a legal framework to protect children and guarantee that
children and parents have the right to benefit from assistance and social
protection (Côte d’Ivoire);
129.174 Promote the mandatory reporting of cases of violence against children
(Botswana);
129.175 Ensure and promote the mandatory reporting of cases of violence
against children, intensify awareness-raising about its forms and negative
impacts among children, parents and professionals working with children, and
establish child-friendly helplines for children (Maldives);
129.176 Improve disaggregated data collection on all forms of violence against
children and continue improving the national response to it, through proper
investigation, prosecution and conviction of perpetrators in such cases
(Romania);
129.177 Ensure that laws on the sexual exploitation and abuse of children and
on violence against children are effectively enforced and that their
implementation is regularly and systematically monitored and evaluated
(Slovenia);
129.178 Continue efforts to combat discrimination against older persons
(Saudi Arabia);
129.179 Harmonize national legislation with the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and actively adopt an inclusive vision of persons with
disabilities in the social, economic and cultural spheres (Costa Rica);
129.180 Harmonize its legislation with the human rights-based model of
disability and adopt a uniform definition of disability, using the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities as a reference (Dominican Republic);
129.181 Harmonize national legislation with the human rights-based model of
disability of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and adopt
measures to remove de jure or de facto barriers that prevent persons with
disabilities from exercising their right to vote and stand for election (Mexico);
129.182 Continue the implementation of the third National Action Plan on
Disability and maintain progress towards the plan for the period 2024–2028
(Chile);
129.183 Strengthen measures to ensure that people with disabilities, children
belonging to minorities, children seeking asylum and children from
disadvantaged families have access to health care, social services and inclusive
mainstream education (Togo);
129.184 Intensify measures to further ensure that children with disabilities,
children from socioeconomically disadvantaged families and children in
situations of vulnerability have access to health care, social services and inclusive
and mainstream education (India);
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 21
129.185 Strengthen protection for people with disabilities by establishing a
comprehensive strategy for their social inclusion (Ukraine);
129.186 Pursue policies to protect the rights of women, children, and people
with disabilities (Burundi);
129.187 Further improve and implement policies and measures to protect the
rights of specific groups, such as women, children, and persons with disabilities
(China);
129.188 Continue its valuable efforts to ensure greater access for people with
disabilities to health services and the labour market (Lebanon);
129.189 Strengthen measures to ensure the special needs of persons with
disabilities, improving their access to education, health care, housing,
employment and information (Lithuania);
129.190 Implement a comprehensive strategy for the inclusion of children with
disabilities (Dominican Republic);
129.191 Continue its work towards advancing the national framework for the
protection of the rights of persons with disabilities (Georgia);
129.192 Enhance the rights of persons with disabilities by adopting a uniform
definition of “disabilities” across the legislative framework, to limit the effect of
legal inconsistencies (Malta);
129.193 Organize the collection of data on children with disabilities with a view
to guiding policies and programmes and facilitating their access to education,
health, social protection and support services (Panama);
129.194 Continue to take all necessary measures to facilitate access to
health-care services for people with disabilities, including children (Republic of
Moldova);
129.195 Facilitate access for children with disabilities to basic social services,
in particular education, health and social protection (Senegal);
129.196 Ensure that all citizens have equal access to rights, regardless of their
ethnicity (Eswatini);
129.197 Develop a set of measures to promote social and economic integration
and create conditions of equality, in order to avoid discrimination against ethnic
minorities in the country (Spain);
129.198 Implement anti-discrimination policies to strengthen tolerance among
the different ethnic groups and promote social cohesion, including by taking
specific measures, such as temporary special measures, to integrate minorities
(Brazil);
129.199 Take bold actions to eradicate the economic, social, linguistic and
cultural barriers facing Turkish Cypriots and other minorities (Azerbaijan);
129.200 Implement administrative measures aimed at identifying and
addressing discriminatory practices experienced by Turkish Cypriots, with a
focus on advocating for legislative and administrative reforms to eliminate such
practices (Azerbaijan);
129.201 Take specific measures to eradicate economic, social and cultural
barriers facing ethnic minorities and facilitate the exercise of the right to freedom
of thought and conscience and for religious minorities, particularly Muslims and
Jews (Gambia);
129.202 Reinforce measures to counter religious hatred and Islamophobia
(Pakistan);
129.203 Strengthen efforts to combat violence and discrimination against
racial and ethnic minorities (Belarus);
A/HRC/57/15
22 GE.24-09776
129.204 Continue efforts to combat racism, racial discrimination and
xenophobia (Egypt);
129.205 Continue taking all steps to combat racism and hate speech (Malawi);
129.206 Continue to improve policies to combat hate speech and hate crimes in
communities and share its best practices with other United Nations Member
States (Kazakhstan);
129.207 Establish a comprehensive monitoring system to combat
discrimination, hate speech and other related intolerance against minority and
vulnerable groups (Malaysia);
129.208 Take all measures to prevent hate speech and all forms of
discrimination, especially based on race, colour, religion and sex (Libya)
129.209 Consider adopting further measures to promote multiculturalism,
acceptance, tolerance and respect for diversity (Serbia);
129.210 Adopt legislation to allow the legal change of name and gender for
people over the age of 18 (Australia);
129.211 Move towards a law that recognizes and guarantees the right to gender
identity (Chile);
129.212 Introduce a transparent self-identification process for legal gender
recognition, free from medical or diagnostic requirements (Iceland);
129.213 Conclude the legislative process to adopt the new legal gender
recognition bill currently under consideration (Malta);
129.214 Guarantee access to free gender-affirming health care, including
hormone treatments and surgeries (Iceland);
129.215 Continue to develop programmes to raise awareness and combat
hatred and violence based on gender identity, sexual orientation or gender
expression (Cuba);
129.216 Continue efforts to combat violence and hate speech on the grounds of
sexual orientation and gender identity (France);
129.217 Permit non-governmental organizations working to protect the rights
of migrants to utilize the banking system without restriction (United States of
America);
129.218 Strengthen further its migration governance framework, including by
adopting the 2024–2026 action plan on the integration and social inclusion of
migrants and ensuring that alleged cases of pushbacks and the ill-treatment of
migrants are properly and promptly investigated (Philippines);
129.219 Strengthen measures to protect the rights of migrants and
asylum-seekers (Belarus);
129.220 Strengthen measures to protect the rights of migrants and refugees,
and improve the reception conditions and access to legal and health services
(Jordan);
129.221 Further strengthen measures to enhance the protection of the
economic and social rights of migrants and refugees (Pakistan);
129.222 Strengthen measures to combat discrimination and achieve equality
for migrants and persons with disabilities with regard to health and education
(Algeria);
129.223 Use the detention of migrants in centres only as a last resort, as
mentioned in objective 13 of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration (Cameroon);
A/HRC/57/15
GE.24-09776 23
129.224 Pursue the implementation of national policies for equal opportunities
and equal treatment in the employment sector, in particular by including
asylum-seekers (Cameroon);
129.225 Improve the identification, protection and care of unaccompanied
minors and vulnerable asylum-seekers (Switzerland);
129.226 Protect the rights of migrants and asylum-seekers by preventing
collective arrests and the detention of asylum-seekers and facilitating timely
access to health-care services and employment (Gambia);
129.227 Bring the conditions in reception facilities for asylum-seekers and
migrants into line with international law standards and ensure that they enjoy
effective access to all necessary services (Islamic Republic of Iran);
129.228 Ensure greater transparency and oversight by civil society to ensure
that temporary protection status is granted to all refugees on equal terms
(Russian Federation);
129.229 Strengthen cooperation with key international and non-governmental
institutions to provide protection and assistance to refugees and asylum-seekers
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
129.230 Assist and protect refugees and asylum-seekers and adhere to its
obligations under international refugee law, including with respect to non-
refoulement (United States of America);
129.231 Take measures to enhance its capacity to manage the hosting of
asylum-seekers and refugees; this includes providing adequate and secure safe
shelter for women and children (Canada);
129.232 Take the necessary measures so that the detention of asylum-seekers is
used only as a means of last resort and for the shortest possible period, on the
basis of an individual assessment to determine that it is a reasonable, necessary
and proportionate measure, and after considering alternatives to deprivation of
liberty (Colombia);
129.233 Ensure that the detention of migrants and asylum-seekers is only used
as a measure of last resort and is reasonable, necessary and proportionate, in
accordance with the Human Rights Committee’s general comment No. 35 (2014)
on liberty and security of person (Kingdom of the Netherlands);
129.234 Review and improve the current systems of care for refugees and
asylum-seekers that take into account the particular needs of those affected
(Paraguay);
129.235 Take urgent legal measures to prevent statelessness by reviewing the
requirements for obtaining nationality for all children born in Cyprus,
particularly children born to refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants (Gambia);
129.236 Review requirements to facilitate the acquisition of Cypriot nationality
for children born in Cyprus who would otherwise be stateless, regardless of their
parents’ citizenship, residence and legal or marital status (Ireland).
130. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/57/15
24 GE.24-09776
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Cyprus was headed by Mr. Andreas KAKOURIS, Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs, and composed of the following members:
• Ms. Olympia NEOCLEOUS, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Cyprus at Geneva;
• Mr. Giorgos SAMUEL, Counsellor, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Cyprus at Geneva;
• Ms. Natalia ANDREOU PANAYIOTOU, Senior Officer, Head, European and
International Affairs Unit, Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance;
• Mr. Panayiotis NICOLAIDES, Superintendent B, Deputy Director, Directorate of
European Union Affairs and International Police Cooperation, Police Headquarters;
• Mr. Andreas TSIAKKIROS, Senior Education Planning Officer, Ministry of
Education, Sport and Youth;
• Ms. Maria SHALI, Senior Prisons Officer, Prisons Department;
• Ms. Vivian KONNARI, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cyprus at
Geneva;
• Mr. Christos MAKRIYIANNIS, First Secretary, Department of Multilateral Affairs
and International Organisations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• Dr. Elena NEOCLEOUS, Administrative Officer A, Office of the Permanent
Secretary, Ministry of Interior;
• Mr. Spyros YIALLOURIDES, Legal Affairs Officer, Department of Human Rights,
Anti-crime and Correctional Policy – Gender-Based Violence, Ministry of Justice and
Public Order;
• Ms. Marina EFTHYMIADOU, Social Welfare Services Officer, Deputy Ministry of
Social Welfare;
• Ms. Eleni PAPANIKOLAOU, Attaché, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cyprus
at Geneva;
• Mr. Sotiris KOULERMOU, Attaché, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cyprus
at Geneva.
