GE.22-27755 (E) 040123 050123
Human Rights Council
Fifty-second session
27 February–31 March 2023
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Finland
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/52/9
General Assembly Distr.: General
5 January 2023
Original: English
A/HRC/52/9
2 GE.22-27755
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its forty-first session from 7 to 18 November
2022. The review of Finland was held at the 6th meeting, on 9 November 2022. The
delegation of Finland was headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Pekka Haavisto. At its
16th meeting, held on 16 November 2022, the Working Group adopted the report on Finland.
2. On 12 January 2022, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Finland: Luxembourg, Mexico and Somalia.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution
5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Finland:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Angola, Canada, Germany, Panama,
Portugal, on behalf of the Group of Friends on national mechanisms for implementation,
reporting and follow-up, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland was transmitted to Finland through the troika. These questions are available
on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Finland, led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, expressed
appreciation for the opportunity to discuss human rights, rule of law and democracy in a
fruitful and forward-looking way, and welcomed the fourth review of Finland under the
universal periodic review mechanism, which coincided with the country’s Human Rights
Council membership. Finland recognized a special obligation to uphold the highest standards
in the promotion and protection of human rights.
6. The universal periodic review was an important tool in ensuring that all human rights
commitments of States were implemented and put into action. The experiences of Finland in
its previous reviews were nothing but positive. The recommendations received in the past
three reviews had been valuable in the country’s efforts to build a better and more just society
for all persons living in Finland.
7. In preparing for the review, Finland had cooperated closely with the Finnish civil
society at large. The Government was pleased to have – as observers – independent
representatives from the Parliament of Finland, the Human Rights Delegation, which was a
part of the national human rights institution, and the Advisory Board for International Human
Rights.
8. Defending human rights, gender equality and non-discrimination formed the very
basis of any democratic society. The delegation underscored the importance of the rules-
based international system, its obligations and the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and binding nature of human rights. Every person has the right to full
enjoyment of all human rights without discrimination.
1 A/HRC/WG.6/41/FIN/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/41/FIN/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/41/FIN/3.
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 3
9. Those rights and principles remained cornerstones of Finnish society and were as
timely as ever.
10. During recent years, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic had had serious
and far-reaching repercussions on the enjoyment of human rights in all corners of the planet.
In many regions, the pandemic was still an ongoing challenge.
11. The ongoing situation in Europe and globally was only underlining the fundamental
importance of safeguarding the human rights of each and everyone, regardless of their
background. The horrors and brutalities witnessed in Ukraine over the past year had also
made the relationship and interlinkages between international human rights law and
international humanitarian law more visible.
12. Crimes against humanity, war crimes and grave human rights violations must never
be tolerated. More needed to be done to bring perpetrators to justice. Finland would continue
to fight against impunity for the most serious international crimes, including crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
13. Over the past years, the interdependence between human rights and the environment
had become evident. Environmental urgency and climate crisis had severe impacts on the
human rights of millions of people all over the world. Finland continued to engage actively
on the interlinkages between human rights and the environment, biodiversity and climate
change.
14. No country was perfect on human rights. According to independent monitoring
reports, the overall human rights situation in general had been fairly good in Finland.
However, Finland also had human rights challenges that needed urgent attention. Many of
those challenges were under discussion at the session.
15. Fundamental and human rights, as well as legal protection, formed the very basis of
Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s government programme. Pursuant to the programme, the
country’s foreign and security policy and development policy were human rights-based. That
had been reaffirmed in the human rights report the Government had submitted to Parliament
late in 2021.
16. The long-term priority of Finland remained the advancement of the rights of women
and girls, in all their diversity, as well as gender equality in all fields of life. The Government
was paying particular attention to defending the rights of those in the most vulnerable
positions. Those included, among others, persons with disabilities, Indigenous Peoples and
persons belonging to various minorities, including Roma.
17. The significance of civil society in monitoring and promoting the implementation of
human rights had increased. The activities of human rights defenders had had positive effects
on the development of fundamental and human rights locally, nationally, regionally and
globally. Finland placed special emphasis on supporting civil society and human rights
defenders all over the world. In 2022, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs had updated the
national guidelines on human rights defenders.
18. The third National Action Plan on Fundamental and Human Rights, covering the
period 2020 to 2023, had been adopted in June 2021. During the preparation of the action
plan, the Government had cooperated broadly with stakeholders, including the national
human rights institution and non-governmental organizations. Special consideration had been
given to the recommendations issued to Finland by the various treaty bodies. The action plan
was focused on developing human rights monitoring at the national level. National
fundamental and human rights indicators had been developed as a key part of the action plan.
They provided a new tool for monitoring fundamental and human rights in the short and long
term.
19. Human rights treaties were crucial tools for holding governments accountable for the
realization of the rights inherent to everyone. The Government had submitted a proposal to
Parliament to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance. The Government had proposed an amendment to the Criminal Code
to criminalize enforced disappearance as a new offence. Since the previous universal periodic
A/HRC/52/9
4 GE.22-27755
review cycle, three human rights treaties of the Council of Europe had entered into force for
Finland when they entered into force internationally.
20. Finland had received several questions about actions on combating and preventing
violence against women. This was understandable, as violence against women remained one
of the most persistent human rights problems in Finnish society. The Government had
implemented several measures. In 2021, a total of 25 million euros had been allocated to 29
shelters. The shelters were open for anyone who had experienced or had been threatened by
domestic violence. The Government had also appointed a special rapporteur on violence
against women. It was clear that Finland needed to step up action to combat violence against
women, including domestic violence as well as sexual and gender-based violence.
21. Finland had also received several well-founded questions about the rights of the Sami.
Finland consistently and actively promoted the rights of Indigenous Peoples, including their
right to participate in decision-making concerning themselves. The Government had been in
regular dialogue with the Sami Parliament in matters affecting their rights. While there was
room for improvement, Finland was fully committed to respecting and promoting the
linguistic and cultural rights of all Sami persons, in line with international obligations. An
important step had been taken when a truth and reconciliation commission had been
established, in full cooperation with the Sami. Concerning the reform of the Sami Parliament
Act, no final result had been achieved to date, but negotiations were ongoing.
22. The Government was also strongly committed to combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, both online and offline. That
commitment was reflected in the Government’s action plan to combat racism and to promote
good relations, adopted in October 2021. For example, in the action plan, the Government
committed to providing training for the police on the prohibition of ethnic profiling. The
training on hate crime and ethnic profiling was mandatory for all police officers and civil
servants in police departments.
23. The existing legislation and the National Roma Policy for 2018 to 2022 provided a
foundation to promote the equality of Roma. A new Roma policy for 2023 to 2030 was being
prepared.
24. Regarding refugees and migrants, Finland stayed committed to respecting the
principle of non-refoulement and to providing international protection for those in need. The
legal protection of asylum-seekers had been strengthened by legislative amendments in 2021.
In addition, the national asylum process had recently been evaluated. The Government had
also submitted to Parliament a proposal aimed at simplifying the family reunification process.
25. In addition, the Government had coordinated particular measures to support the tens
of thousands of Ukrainians in Finland who were in need of international protection because
of the war of aggression by the Russian Federation against Ukraine.
26. The Government was fully aware of the need to continue the work on addressing
discrimination against persons with disabilities in all fields. The second national action plan
in this area, for the years 2020 to 2023, had been published in 2021. There was an urgent
need to find new solutions in order to overcome barriers and increase the participation of
persons with disabilities in the labour market. Additionally, the legislation on disability
services was currently being reformed.
27. The Government remained aware of the need to ensure that the rights of older persons
were fully protected in all circumstances. A new ombudsman for older persons had taken
office in 2022. The duty of the ombudsman was to promote and assess the realization of the
fundamental and human rights of older people in relevant legislation and decision-making
processes.
28. Many LGBTIQ+ persons living in Finland faced discrimination in their everyday
lives. The Government was strongly committed to protecting the rights of sexual and gender
minorities. An important step forward had been taken in September 2022, when the
Government’s proposal for an act on the legal recognition of gender that respected people’s
right to self-determination (referred to as the “trans act”) had been submitted to Parliament.
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 5
29. The proposal for a new animal welfare act was before Parliament. The proposed new
provision concerning religious slaughter would be further discussed by Parliament, including
by its Constitutional Law Committee. Finland would continue discussions on that question
with the religious communities in Finland. Their concerns were taken very seriously.
30. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs served as a focal point for recommendations under
the universal periodic review mechanism and from the treaty bodies. Furthermore, the
Government’s Network for Fundamental and Human Rights reviewed all recommendations
addressed to Finland and followed up on their implementation.
31. Human rights belong to all. Governments should not and must not allow any person
or group to be left behind. To achieve that goal, all Governments, including Finland, needed
to step up their work to realize universal human rights.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
32. During the interactive dialogue, 90 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
33. Uruguay welcomed the achievements made under the third National Action Plan on
Fundamental and Human Rights.
34. Uzbekistan highlighted the attention being paid to the protection of human rights
within the context of climate change, noting the adoption of the new Climate Change Act.
35. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised Finland for taking into account the
recommendations of the treaty bodies.
36. Viet Nam commended Finland for its establishment of new domestic human rights
structures.
37. Zambia praised the implementation of accepted universal periodic review
recommendations and the progress Finland had made in many areas.
38. Algeria noted with appreciation that the Finnish institutional framework had been
further expanded with an ombudsperson for older persons; a special rapporteur on violence
against women; and the Rule of Law Centre, which operated under the auspices of the Faculty
of Law at the University of Helsinki.
39. Argentina welcomed the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental
and Human Rights.
40. Armenia was pleased to learn that a number of important international instruments,
such as the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearances, were scheduled for consideration for ratification.
41. Australia welcomed actions taken by Finland to establish a national action plan to
address domestic and family violence, and the recent amendment to the Criminal Code to
strengthen protection against sexual crimes.
42. Bangladesh commended Finland for its continuous efforts to meet its official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent of its gross national income.
43. Belarus welcomed the delegation of Finland and presented recommendations.
44. Brazil was concerned about the high incidence of violence against women and
discriminatory acts, particularly against the Sami population.
45. Bulgaria noted with appreciation that the third National Action Plan on Fundamental
and Human Rights continued to strengthen the monitoring of human rights set out in the
previous plans.
46. Cambodia welcomed the adoption of various pieces of legislation, policies and action
plans, and the establishment of institutional mechanisms, including in the areas of
employment opportunities for persons with disabilities and protection of victims of
trafficking in persons.
A/HRC/52/9
6 GE.22-27755
47. Canada encouraged Finland to take further measures to improve the availability of
services for victims of domestic and gender-based violence.
48. Chile congratulated Finland for its third National Action Plan on Fundamental and
Human Rights for the period 2020 to 2023, which was aimed at strengthening human rights
monitoring.
49. China expressed concern about the violation of the rights of the Sami people in
Finland and about discrimination and hate crime against groups such as people of African
descent, Muslims, Roma, refugees and immigrants.
50. Colombia welcomed the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental
and Human Rights.
51. The Congo noted with appreciation progress in achieving the objectives of sustainable
development and in implementing the principle of equal pay between men and women.
52. Costa Rica welcomed the modification of the definition of rape in the Criminal Code,
undertaken following previous recommendations.
53. Côte d’Ivoire noted with appreciation the appointment of the ombudsman for older
persons and of a special rapporteur on violence against women.
54. Croatia welcomed efforts in combating violence against women, including the
conduct of awareness-raising campaigns.
55. Cuba noted with appreciation the commitment of Finland to the universal periodic
review exercise.
56. Cyprus commended Finland for appointing an ombudsperson for older persons and a
special rapporteur on violence against women.
57. Denmark welcomed the developments with regard to the rights of Indigenous Peoples
in Finland, but remained concerned that not all necessary steps were being taken in relation
to the Sami people.
58. Egypt called on Finland to strengthen its efforts to combat domestic violence and
violence against women, and to implement the recommendations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
59. Estonia welcomed in particular the enactment of an action plan for combating violence
against women (2020–2023) and the establishment of an independent national rapporteur on
gender-based violence.
60. Eswatini noted the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental and
Human Rights.
61. France welcomed the continued attention paid by the Finnish authorities to the
promotion and protection of human rights, in particular fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of the press.
62. Gabon welcomed the adoption, in 2021, of a national plan of action to combat racism
and promote good relations among population groups.
63. The Gambia welcomed the action plans for the implementation of the Council of
Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence (the Istanbul Convention).
64. Georgia praised the adoption of the plan to combat racism, the national child strategy,
structural reforms in the social welfare and health-care systems, and the efforts to combat
violence against women.
65. Germany expressed concern about the rights of marginalized groups, particularly the
Sami people, religious minorities, and sexual and gender minorities.
66. Greece commended Finland for its commitment to the Sustainable Development
Goals and its efforts in attaining the Goals related to social and economic sustainability.
67. Iceland welcomed the national report of Finland and made recommendations.
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 7
68. India saluted the enactment of human rights-related legislation and programmes,
particularly the National Action Plan on Fundamental and Human Rights and the government
report on human rights policy.
69. Indonesia thanked Finland for its national report and made recommendations.
70. The Islamic Republic of Iran made recommendations.
71. Iraq commended Finland for the legislative reforms aimed at harmonizing policies
with the country’s international commitments, notably the establishment of the office of the
ombudsman for older persons.
72. Ireland hailed progress on LGBTI+ issues, including a motion to amend the
transgender legislation, and noted the assurance to amend the definition of rape in the
Criminal Code.
73. Israel praised the steps taken to combat violence against women, including through
awareness-raising campaigns, and the announcement that Finland would conduct a reform of
legislation on sexual offences.
74. Italy welcomed efforts to address the issue of domestic violence and violence against
women, including through the action plan for the implementation of the Istanbul Convention.
75. Kazakhstan expressed appreciation for the efforts to protect the rights of migrants,
refugees and ethnic minorities, in particular efforts made through the action plan to combat
racism and the new action plan against trafficking in persons.
76. Lebanon commended Finland for its National Action Plan on Fundamental and
Human Rights and the government report on human rights policy, as well as the inclusive
dialogue with civil society to prepare the national report.
77. Libya welcomed the positive engagement by Finland with the universal periodic
review mechanism.
78. Liechtenstein thanked Finland for its strong commitment to the protection of human
rights and for being a reliable partner in the Human Rights Council.
79. Lithuania welcomed implementation of the action plan for combating violence against
women and the action plan for the implementation of the Istanbul Convention.
80. Luxembourg thanked Finland for the presentation of its national report and made
recommendations.
81. The delegation of Finland took the floor to address some of the issues raised,
particularly in relation to the Istanbul Convention. Violence against women was an issue that
the Government took very seriously, and Finland had implemented a number of positive steps
to combat it.
82. Finland had recently completed comprehensive legislative reform regarding sexual
offences, and had doubled the funds dedicated to shelters for victims of violence since 2016.
However, more needed to be done to prevent and reduce violence against women in every
part of the society.
83. The Government had stated that it would continue working towards the renewal of the
Sami Parliament Act. A committee consisting of representatives of both the Sami Parliament
and the government parties had drafted a revised act, which included proposed changes aimed
at enhancing the right of the Sami people to self-determination. A truth and reconciliation
commission had been established on 21 October, in collaboration with the Sami Parliament.
The five members of the commission would be impartial and independent, would investigate
and learn from events in history and would propose actions towards reconciliation.
84. The delegation also stated that Finland would look into the possibility of ratifying the
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) of the International Labour
Organization (ILO). An assessment on that matter would be finalized by the Ministry of
Justice in early 2023.
85. The quota for refugees had been further increased to 1,500, in response to the situation
in Afghanistan, and the 2023 refugee code would include a quota of 1,050 refugees.
A/HRC/52/9
8 GE.22-27755
86. Finland sought to emphasize the resettlement of the most vulnerable refugees,
including families, women and children at risk, and received emergency resettlement cases
through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
87. The Government had recently submitted to Parliament a proposal aimed at simplifying
the family reunification process. The proposal would waive the existing requirement for
proof of sufficient resources for family members and children.
88. More than 13,000 children had fled from Ukraine to Finland owing to the ongoing
war.
89. Finland was combating racism and discrimination in all their forms and in all sectors
of society. Finland was not free from racism; however, the constitution provided strong
protection of the dignity and integrity of individuals and was aimed at promoting a just
society.
90. The Government had developed a mechanism for gathering data on hate crime and
hate speech, particularly on antisemitism and Islamophobia, and had strengthened the
capacity of various stakeholders that combated hate speech and crimes.
91. Regarding education, democracy and human rights were strongly represented in the
core curriculum. The Government issued academic grants for pilot projects on democracy
and human rights education. It had invested to ensure that persons with disabilities received
more equal and equitable treatment. Everyone was valuable, and the Government aimed to
ensure that persons with disabilities would be more aware of their rights, and to support the
effective exercise of those rights in practice.
92. The delegation addressed several other concerns that had been raised during the
review, including with regard to the military service and its alternatives, enforced
disappearances, animal welfare, the environment and climate change, the rights of the Sami
people, vulnerable groups and asylum-seekers.
93. Malawi commended Finland for its new Climate Act, which had entered into force in
July 2022.
94. Malaysia commended Finland for the multi-stakeholder consultations for the
preparation for the universal periodic review and the third National Action Plan for
Fundamental and Human Rights.
95. Maldives commended Finland for its efforts to address climate change, environmental
degradation and the loss of biodiversity, and welcomed the new Climate Change Act.
96. Malta welcomed the delegation of Finland and thanked it for the presentation of its
national report.
97. Mauritius applauded the efforts to combat violence against women by increasing
awareness campaigns and by creating a hotline service.
98. Mexico noted the reform to legislation on abortion, and the amendment regarding
sexual crimes.
99. Montenegro welcomed the long-standing policy to protect and promote human rights,
democracy and rule of law in national and international settings.
100. Morocco welcomed the implementation of the third National Action Plan on
Fundamental Rights and Human Rights for 2020 to 2023.
101. Mozambique commended Finland for the measures taken to implement the
recommendations of the third universal periodic review cycle, in particular the adoption of
the national action plan to combat racism and promote good relations.
102. Namibia thanked Finland for the establishment of new structures, including the
appointment of a special rapporteur on violence against women.
103. Nepal commended Finland for the development of its national child strategy, which
was focused on a child rights-based approach.
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 9
104. The Netherlands commended Finland for the implementation of many of the previous
recommendations, including the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental
and Human Rights.
105. The Niger welcomed the commitment of Finland to promoting and protecting the
human rights of refugees, migrants and ethnic minorities through the adoption of an action
plan to combat racism and promote good relations between population groups.
106. Nigeria positively noted the initiatives to address racism and racial discrimination,
particularly the adoption of the action plan to combat racism and promote good relations.
107. Norway noted the important progress made through human rights monitoring
programmes, and the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission to investigate
injustices committed against the Sami people.
108. Pakistan noted the measures taken to promote the human rights agenda, and the
progress made in attaining the Sustainable Development Goals.
109. Panama expressed appreciation for the presentation of the national report and wished
Finland success in the fourth cycle of the universal periodic review.
110. Paraguay expressed concern over the situation of migrants and Indigenous Peoples,
and about the legal framework on statelessness.
111. Peru noted the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental and Human
Rights.
112. The Philippines noted with concern reported incidents of ethnic profiling of, and hate
speech and hate crime against, minority groups.
113. Poland encouraged Finland to continue to pay attention to the situation of migrant and
seasonal workers, with a view to upholding their rights.
114. Portugal noted the establishment of an ombudsperson for older persons and a special
rapporteur on violence against women.
115. The Republic of Moldova noted the national action plan to protect human rights, the
framework for combating discrimination and efforts to promote gender equality.
116. The Russian Federation expressed concern over the ban on the issuance of tourist visas
to, and over the seizing of real estate of, citizens of the Russian Federation.
117. Samoa noted the adoption of the third National Action Plan on Fundamental and
Human Rights and the Climate Change Act.
118. Saudi Arabia expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Finland to protect human
rights, in particular to tackle inequality.
119. Sierra Leone welcomed the progressive developments achieved by Finland, including
the establishment of an action plan to implement the Istanbul Convention.
120. Slovenia expressed concern about the growing number of cases of domestic violence
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the inaccessibility of support services for victims.
121. South Sudan thanked Finland for the presentation of its national report and expressed
appreciation for the efforts made to protect human rights.
122. Spain expressed hope that the special rapporteur on violence against women could act
in regions in which women might have fewer facilities to report violence.
123. Sri Lanka commended Finland for improving human rights in the country, and for
actions taken to end violence against women and racism.
124. The State of Palestine commended Finland for the commitment of the Government to
promoting and protecting human rights.
125. The Syrian Arab Republic acknowledged the national report of Finland and made
recommendations.
A/HRC/52/9
10 GE.22-27755
126. Thailand expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Finland in improving the
rights of migrant workers, combating trafficking and improving the realization of business
and human rights.
127. Timor-Leste commended Finland for the progress made in the prevention of violence,
radicalization and extremism, and for combating violence against women.
128. Togo commended Finland for improving the rights of older persons and for combating
violence against women.
129. Tunisia thanked Finland for the submission of its report and presented
recommendations.
130. Turkmenistan welcomed the inclusive approach taken by Finland towards the
protection of human rights through the adoption of policies and the promotion of employment
opportunities for people with disabilities.
131. Ukraine acknowledged steps taken by Finland to combat all forms of violence,
particularly violence against women, and the recent proposal to ratify international
conventions to which it was not yet a party.
132. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland recognized the exemplary
human rights record of Finland, but noticed a need for improvement regarding violence
against women and discrimination against persons with disabilities and religious minorities.
133. The United Republic of Tanzania welcomed the developments achieved since the
previous review. It commended Finland for the reforms in social welfare and health care.
134. The United States of America welcomed the delegation from Finland and commended
the State for its longstanding commitment to promoting human rights domestically and
globally.
135. To conclude, the delegation of Finland took the floor to address a number of issues
that had been raised during the latter part of the Working Group session.
136. The delegation expressed gratitude for the frank and open debate, and expressed its
appreciation for all those who had participated. Finland looked forward, with an open
attitude, to examining all the recommendations with the members of the troika.
137. The Government’s Network for Fundamental and Human Rights, with representatives
of all ministries and the supreme overseers of legality, would review all recommendations
received, and would follow up on their implementation. Members of Finnish civil society
would be invited to engage in the follow-up to the recommendations and identify
recommendations that were expected to be prioritized by the Government.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
138. The response of Finland to the following recommendations will be included in
the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its fifty-second session:
138.1 Ratify the remaining core human rights treaties (Samoa);
138.2 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chile) (Congo) (Côte
d’Ivoire) (Egypt) (Libya) (Philippines);
138.3 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Bangladesh)
(Colombia) (Indonesia) (Malawi) (Niger);
138.4 Step up measures for protection of migrant workers, including
through the ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Sri Lanka);
Consider ways forward for the ratification of the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (Algeria); Consider taking further necessary measures to ensure
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 11
adequate protection of the rights of migrants and refugees, including through the
ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Nigeria); Consolidate
measures to protect migrants, with a view to ratifying the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families (Morocco);
138.5 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, signed on 6 February 2007 (France);
138.6 Adopt the necessary measures to ratify the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina);
Continue to strengthen efforts to ratify the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Italy); Consider
ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance (Malawi);
138.7 Continue to ratify international human rights treaties, such as the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance (Slovenia);
138.8 Ratify the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No.
169), thereby committing to uphold the full measures of human rights and
fundamental freedoms (Denmark); Ratify the ILO Indigenous and Tribal
Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) (Germany);
138.9 Redouble ongoing efforts with a view to ratifying ILO Convention No.
169 (Peru);
138.10 Redouble efforts to ratify the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention, 1989 (No. 169) (South Sudan);
138.11 Ratify ILO Convention No. 169, on Indigenous Peoples’ rights, and
redouble efforts to ensure the realization of all of the human rights of the
Indigenous Sami people, particularly to a healthy environment and to receive
education, social care and health services in their own language (Brazil);
138.12 Ratify ILO Convention No. 169 and the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (Paraguay);
138.13 Engage the Sami people in the ratification process of the ILO
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) (Norway);
138.14 Finalize the ratification process of ILO Convention No. 169, and
strengthen measures to obtain the free and informed consent of the Sami people
on projects that affect them (Mexico);
138.15 Ratify the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190)
(Namibia);
138.16 Consider accession to the International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries (Armenia);
138.17 Review the reservations to the Convention relating to the Status of
Stateless Persons, with a view to lifting them (Zambia);
138.18 Withdraw the reservations to the Convention on the Status of Stateless
Persons and strengthen its application system of the refuge institution, with
international cooperation as one of the pillars for its implementation (Paraguay);
138.19 Strengthen the protection of human rights by ensuring cohesion and
closer cooperation between relevant agencies and bodies (Australia);
138.20 Consider the nomination of national candidates for elections to the
United Nations human rights treaty bodies through an appropriate selection
process (Bulgaria);
A/HRC/52/9
12 GE.22-27755
138.21 Follow up on the recommendations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Human Rights Committee to renew
the Sami Parliament Act in dialogue with the Sami people and in accordance
with the right of Indigenous Peoples to self-determination (Norway);
138.22 Cooperate fully for the reform of the Sami Parliament Act as
recommended by the Human Rights Committee, and strengthen the application
of the principle of free, prior and informed consent in all legislation on Sami
rights (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
138.23 Ensure that the right to self-determination is protected for the Sami,
including through possible amendments to the Sami Parliament Act (Australia);
138.24 Proceed with the amendment of the Sami Parliament Act to strengthen
the Indigenous Sami people’s right to self-determination (Canada);
138.25 Amend the Sami Parliament Act in order to ensure the appropriate
political rights for the Sami people (Denmark);
138.26 Review the Sami Parliament Act with a view to progressing the rights
of Indigenous Peoples, specifically facilitating the right of the Sami people to self-
determination (Ireland);
138.27 Continue systematically assessing the human rights impacts of
legislative proposals (Cyprus);
138.28 Revise anti-discrimination laws and equal opportunity legislation to
provide better and intersectional victim protection (Germany);
138.29 Take all necessary steps to review the Non-Discrimination Act and
other relevant anti-discrimination laws to improve the effectiveness of the legal
and institutional framework to combat discrimination (Viet Nam);
138.30 Review and amend the Non-Discrimination Act and other relevant
anti-discrimination laws to further improve the effectiveness of the legal and
institutional framework to combat discrimination (Timor-Leste);
138.31 Improve the legal framework and institutional measures to combat
discrimination and enhance access to effective remedies for victims of
discrimination (Sri Lanka);
138.32 Insert a provision in the Criminal Code criminalizing forced marriage
(Iceland);
138.33 Continue to address sexual and gender-based violence, including by
adopting specific legislation criminalizing forced marriage (Ireland);
138.34 Continue strengthening national laws on offences related to violence
against women and girls (Sri Lanka);
138.35 Adopt legislation obligating regions and municipalities to establish
effective preventive measures to combat violence against women (Indonesia);
138.36 Decriminalize defamation and place it within a civil code in accordance
with international standards (Kazakhstan);
138.37 Review criminal legislation to adequately identify and reflect the
aggravating factors required under article 46 of the Istanbul Convention
(Spain);
138.38 Ensure that government legislation, including the Animal Welfare Act,
does not restrict individuals’ ability to practice their religion or belief freely in a
manner which is incompatible with international human rights law, including
article 9 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
138.39 Review and strengthen current policies and initiatives to combat
societal discrimination against members of racial, religious and ethnic minority
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 13
groups, including by providing an exemption for religious minorities in the draft
animal welfare legislation (United States of America);
138.40 Continue promoting a business and human rights agenda, for example
by providing technical cooperation and capacity-building activities for interested
States in developing their national action plans and conducting human rights due
diligence (Thailand);
138.41 Establish a permanent national mechanism for the implementation,
reporting on and follow-up of recommendations on human rights, considering
the possibility of receiving cooperation for this purpose, within the framework of
Sustainable Development Goals 16 and 17 (Paraguay);
138.42 Further strengthen the national human rights institution, including
through greater resource allocation (Pakistan);
138.43 Continue implementing measures against discrimination by expanding
focus areas (Georgia);
138.44 Take effective measures to prevent both online and offline hate speech,
firmly and publicly condemn such speech and intensify efforts aimed at
addressing online hate speech (Viet Nam);
138.45 Continue its good efforts to fight against discrimination, racism and
hate speech (Algeria);
138.46 Enhance efforts in combating racism, xenophobia and hate crimes,
especially those targeting migrants and asylum-seekers (Indonesia);
138.47 Continue its efforts to combat racism and hate speech and promote
tolerance throughout the society (Bangladesh);
138.48 Take measures aimed at reducing hate speech and hate crimes,
strengthen opposition to discrimination and violence that are carried out on
racial, religious, ethnic and other grounds, and provide effective legal protection
for victims of such crimes (Belarus);
138.49 Guarantee the application of more effective measures to combat
racism, with adequate resources in all existing institutions and policies; ensure
that the security forces receive mandatory training in human rights, especially
in the fight against discrimination and hate speech; ensure that judicial
authorities conduct prompt and impartial investigations and trials for hate
crimes committed by police and security forces; and ensure a credible protection
programme for victims (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
138.50 Ensure that training programmes for law enforcement officials at all
levels include mandatory training on human rights, including anti-
discrimination training, and training on combating hate speech and hate crime
(Bulgaria);
138.51 Further take all necessary steps for addressing hate speech and hate
crimes, including providing training to central and local authorities and law
enforcement officials (Republic of Moldova);
138.52 Ensure that the law enforcement, security and judicial authorities have
the necessary knowledge and skills to address hate crimes against asylum-
seekers, refugees and immigrants, especially Muslims (Islamic Republic of Iran);
138.53 Take appropriate action towards the provision of human rights
training to teachers, as a means of diminishing discrimination against students
from migrant backgrounds (Greece);
138.54 Take effective measures to combat racial discrimination, xenophobia
and hate crimes online and offline (China);
138.55 Step up measures to eradicate ethnic profiling by police forces and
avoid discriminatory treatment (Costa Rica);
A/HRC/52/9
14 GE.22-27755
138.56 Continue to address the issue of racial and ethnic profiling, including
among its enforcement officials (Malaysia);
138.57 Continue efforts in the fight against racial discrimination and hate
speech (Côte d’Ivoire);
138.58 Continue strengthening laws that combat racism and hate crimes by
ensuring effective and prompt investigations and prosecutions of hate crimes
(Eswatini);
138.59 Step up efforts to combat discrimination, hate speech and incitement
to violence based on race and ethnic group (Gabon);
138.60 Continue measures to combat hate speech and hate crimes (Georgia);
138.61 Ensure that effective efforts to combat racism are adequately funded
and systematically implemented in existing structures, institutions and policies
(Greece);
138.62 Pursue efforts undertaken in combating intolerance, hate speech and
hate crimes against vulnerable and minorities (Lebanon);
138.63 Adopt a national plan to combat extremism, intolerance and hatred
against vulnerable and minority groups (Libya);
138.64 Continue its efforts to combat, both online and offline, discrimination,
hate speech and incitement to discrimination on the grounds of, inter alia, race,
ethnicity, religion or sexual orientation and gender identity (Liechtenstein);
138.65 Take further efforts to combat discrimination, hate speech and
incitement to discrimination or violence, particularly on the grounds of race,
ethnicity, religion or sexual orientation and gender identity (Montenegro);
138.66 Continue efforts to combat racial discrimination by strengthening the
prevention policy (Morocco);
138.67 Enhance the efforts against racial discrimination (Mozambique);
138.68 Take effective measures to combat, prevent and eliminate racial
discrimination and hate speech and other related intolerances (Namibia);
138.69 Step up efforts to combat discrimination, hate speech and violence on
the grounds of, inter alia, ethnicity, race and religion (Nepal);
138.70 Cease discrimination against persons on the basis of nationality, cancel
unlawful decisions, and take effective measures to prevent such cases in the
future (Russian Federation);
138.71 Continue efforts to improve its legal and institutional frameworks to
protect against discrimination and inequality, in order to ensure the necessary
legal protection, provided that it is constantly evaluated, so as to fully reflect its
obligations under the law (Saudi Arabia);
138.72 Ensure prompt and thorough investigation for all cases of hate crimes
(Sierra Leone);
138.73 Redouble efforts to combat discrimination, hate speech and incitement
to discrimination or violence (State of Palestine);
138.74 Conduct a comprehensive review of the Government’s action plan to
combat racism to ensure that all forms of racial discrimination and xenophobia
are effectively addressed, and combat the ideas of so-called “racial superiority”
and hate speech (Syrian Arab Republic);
138.75 Intensify its efforts to combat discrimination, hate speech and
incitement to discrimination or violence on any ground (Timor-Leste);
138.76 Step up efforts to combat racial discrimination, hate speech and
incitement to discrimination and violence based on race or religion, by
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 15
encouraging the reporting of hate crimes, and ensuring that such crimes are
thoroughly investigated, and perpetrators prosecuted and punished (Tunisia);
138.77 Enhance efforts to promote tolerance and intercultural understanding
with the aim of eliminating racism and discrimination in all sectors of society
(Turkmenistan);
138.78 End the detention of conscientious objectors to military service and
ensure that civilian alternatives to military service are non-punitive and non-
discriminatory and remain under civilian control, as recommended during the
third universal periodic review cycle (Uruguay);
138.79 Take measures to ensure that alternatives to military service are not
punitive or discriminatory in terms of their nature or duration (Croatia);
138.80 Ensure that alternative solutions to military service are not punitive or
discriminatory and remain civilian in nature, outside military command and
fully accessible to all (Luxembourg);
138.81 Ensure that alternatives to military service are non-punitive and non-
discriminatory in terms of their nature or duration and preserve their civilian
character; and halt all prosecutions of people who refuse to perform military
service on grounds of conscience and release those who are serving prison
sentences for that reason (Panama);
138.82 Take measures to raise awareness among the public on the right to
conscientious objection to military service, and extend the possibility to
alternative service (Costa Rica);
138.83 Consider setting up a special protection mechanism for human rights
defenders and their families (Eswatini);
138.84 Ensure that its counter-terrorism legislation, in particular the
definitions it contains and the powers provided for therein as well as their limits,
is compatible with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
with the principles of legality, legal certainty, predictability and proportionality
(Luxembourg);
138.85 Encourage the reporting of hate crimes and ensure that hate crimes
are thoroughly investigated, perpetrators prosecuted and victims provided with
effective remedies (Zambia);
138.86 Continue efforts to ensure that hate crimes are thoroughly
investigated, and bring perpetrators to justice, and provide effective remedies
for victims (Iraq);
138.87 Provide victims of violence access to effective remedies and means of
protection and assistance and continue its efforts to provide law enforcement
officials, prosecutors, judges and lawyers with appropriate training (Islamic
Republic of Iran);
138.88 Ensure proper and timely investigation and access to justice, including
by strengthening judicial procedures for trafficking in persons and gender-based
violence related crimes (United States of America);
138.89 Ensure the effective and continuous assessment of crimes related to all
types of violence (Ukraine);
138.90 Intensify efforts to repatriate all Finnish citizens and their children
from areas of armed conflict (Iraq);
138.91 Intensify efforts to repatriate all Finnish nationals, and their children,
who are currently in armed conflict zones, through a transparent and impartial
procedure that respects the principle of the best interests of the child and, once
they have been repatriated, provide them with adequate access to rehabilitation
services and assistance (Panama);
A/HRC/52/9
16 GE.22-27755
138.92 Assume its responsibilities towards its nationals who are foreign
terrorist fighters and their families detained in the north-east of the Syrian Arab
Republic, repatriate them in a manner that respects international law, and stop
politicizing this issue (Syrian Arab Republic);
138.93 Decriminalize attacks on the sanctity of religion and protect freedom
of thought, conscience and religion as well as freedom of expression, in
accordance with articles 18 and 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (Luxembourg);
138.94 Ensure freedom of worship for all religious communities, including
ritual practices (Israel);
138.95 Strengthen policies to support the family as the natural and
fundamental unit of society (Egypt);
138.96 Provide adequate resources to combat the exploitation and trafficking
of human beings (Gabon);
138.97 Further adopt effective legislation in order to prevent and combat
human trafficking (Republic of Moldova);
138.98 Take effective measures to prevent and eradicate human trafficking
(Russian Federation);
138.99 Continue efforts to provide equal employment opportunity to all
(India);
138.100 Improve conditions for wage equity (Germany);
138.101 Continue making efforts and taking measures to ensure a clearer and
more efficient social security system, as required by the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Cambodia);
138.102 Continue addressing the shortage of affordable and quality residential
care for older persons (Croatia);
138.103 Guarantee in its legislation the rights of older persons and allocate
sufficient resources to monitor the residential care of older persons, in terms of
both quality and quantity (South Sudan);
138.104 Guarantee in its legislation the rights of older persons to independent
living and affordable and quality care, including residential care (Slovenia);
138.105 Ensure access to health services for everyone without discrimination
(Pakistan);
138.106 Ensure access for everyone, without distinction, to appropriate care
(Tunisia);
138.107 Consider strengthening primary health-care services to enhance their
availability and accessibility throughout the country, with a view to ensuring
equal access to all groups (Malta);
138.108 Provide accessible, affordable and equitable access to primary health
services, thus achieving universal health coverage, in line with recommendations
of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Mauritius);
138.109 Take concrete steps to ensure that undocumented migrants have
effective access to affordable and appropriate health-care services (Argentina);
138.110 Adopt measures to ensure that undocumented migrants have effective
access to health-care services that are adequate and affordable (Costa Rica);
138.111 Improve the system of assistance to young people, migrants, persons
with disabilities and other categories of citizens who are faced with
unemployment in finding jobs, take measures to provide additional social
support to vulnerable groups and increase the availability of health-care services
(Belarus);
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 17
138.112 Strengthen efforts to protect people’s right to life and health, especially
the lives and health of older persons, persons with disabilities and women
(China);
138.113 Increase the availability of affordable mental health-care services
(Maldives);
138.114 Provide high-quality social and mental health services for children and
young people and reinforce training in trauma and mental health for
professionals working with children and young people (Estonia);
138.115 Increase the availability of mental health-care services in all regions
and enhance services for preventive and early interventions, especially for
children and youth (Panama);
138.116 Create equal access to mental health care across the country, especially
for the physically challenged and children (Sierra Leone);
138.117 Review the Mental Health Act by aligning it with the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the right-to-health framework, with a
view to eliminate stigmatization, violence and coercion in mental health and
increasing the availability of community-based services (Portugal);
138.118 Place human rights at the core of any response to fight the pandemic,
through fair distribution of vaccines, medicines, tools and remedies to all,
without discrimination (Cambodia);
138.119 Continue to ensure equal access to inclusive education for all children
(India);
138.120 Ensure equal access to inclusive education for all children, including
children with a migrant background (Viet Nam);
138.121 Take further measures that will centre on issues of inclusive education
for children from vulnerable groups or at the risk of marginalization, such as
Roma children (Armenia);
138.122 Continue to expand the opportunities for young people with disabilities
to receive professional training and find employment within the framework of
the ongoing reforms in vocational education (Bulgaria);
138.123 Take further steps to promote equal opportunities for the Roma
community in education and employment (India);
138.124 Strengthen measures to ensure equal access to education for all girls
and boys, including Roma and those with a migrant background (Peru);
138.125 Further support the work of the steering group for the development of
democracy and human rights education, with an aim to advance human rights
education (Turkmenistan);
138.126 Fully implement the new Climate Change Act and go beyond the
emission reductions targets as set under the new Act (Samoa);
138.127 Ensure all stakeholders are consulted in climate-related legislative
processes (Cyprus);
138.128 Continue to mainstream the rights of children and the rights of
indigenous peoples in Finland’s national work addressing climate change
(Samoa);
138.129 Abandon the practice of using unilateral coercive measures that are
contrary to international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that
have an adverse impact on the enjoyment of human rights (Belarus);
138.130 Take effective measures to end the compliance with illegal unilateral
coercive measures that are contrary to international law and international
human rights (Islamic Republic of Iran);
A/HRC/52/9
18 GE.22-27755
138.131 Take and report on concrete policy measures to establish legislation
that addresses the involvement of corporations in conflict-affected areas,
including situations of foreign occupation, to prevent all violations (State of
Palestine);
138.132 Enhance its efforts to increase women’s participation in the public and
private sectors and their representation at the highest level (Timor-Leste);
138.133 Continue the implementation of measures to tackle the salary gap
between women and men and the segregation of professions for reasons of
gender, which are particular challenges for all; actions adopted and useful
experience will be of particular interest (Colombia);
138.134 Continue to close the pay gap between men and women by eliminating
significant segregation on the basis of sex in the labour market (Russian
Federation);
138.135 Promote gender equality and effectively combat violence against
women (China);
138.136 Take further action to ensure the allocation of resources towards
combating violence against women, in accordance with its obligations under
international human rights institutions (Greece);
138.137 Encourage coordination among the various national structures in
charge of assisting women and girls escaping violence (Costa Rica);
138.138 Increase the number of shelters and rape crisis centres in the country,
especially in the remote rural areas (Croatia);
138.139 Continue working to eradicate domestic violence and manifestations
of discrimination against women and girls, guarantee effective resources for
reparation and reduce the duration of processes in legal proceedings (Cuba);
138.140 Prepare a national plan to combat violence and discrimination against
women and provide access and financial aid to support services, and strengthen
cooperation between different government agencies (Islamic Republic of Iran);
138.141 Continue efforts to prevent and combat domestic violence (Italy);
138.142 Continue active efforts to combat all kinds of violence, especially
domestic violence, by expanding engagement and cooperation between different
authorities and other relevant stakeholders addressing this issue (Lithuania);
138.143 Continue strengthening measures to end domestic violence, including
by improving the process for legal recourse for victims (Malaysia);
138.144 Continue its efforts towards preventing all kinds of violence, including
domestic violence (Nepal);
138.145 Take additional effective measures to prevent domestic violence
(Russian Federation);
138.146 Take measures aimed at strengthening the capacity of national human
rights mechanisms, especially in protecting victims of domestic and gender-based
violence (Uzbekistan);
138.147 Guarantee victims of domestic violence and of violence against women
access to sufficient, multiprofessional services that are adapted to individual
needs, accessible and distributed geographically (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela);
138.148 Continue its efforts to prevent violence against women (Algeria);
138.149 Take the necessary measures to ensure the reporting of cases of
violence against women, the trial and conviction of its perpetrators, to increase
the number of shelters and assistance centres in case of rape, especially in rural
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 19
areas, and to eliminate court fees for unsuccessful restraining order applications
(Argentina);
138.150 Harmonize its action plan for combating violence against women and
its action plan for implementation of the Istanbul Convention (Australia);
138.151 Ensure the effective enforcement of the Istanbul Convention and the
implementation of the action plan for 2022–2025 to eradicate all types of violence
against women and support victims of such crimes (Brazil);
138.152 Continue the effective implementation of the national plan (2022–
2025) to implement the Istanbul Convention, further facilitating access by
women and girls to justice and the reporting of violence against them (France);
138.153 Consider adopting legislation obligating regions and municipalities to
establish effective preventive measures to reduce and eliminate violence against
women (Cambodia);
138.154 Implement public policies to eradicate all forms of violence against
women (Chile);
138.155 Continue determined actions to end gender-based violence and
violence against women and girls, including domestic violence (Cyprus);
138.156 Take further measures to address violence against women, by both
encouraging the reporting of and improving the identification of the cases of
violence against women and domestic violence (Estonia);
138.157 Ensure that all law enforcement officials, prosecutors, judges and
lawyers receive systematic mandatory training on fundamental and human
rights, including appropriate training on how to effectively deal with cases of
violence against women (Estonia);
138.158 Increase resources for efforts against violence against women,
including legal accountability, and offer trauma-responsive care (Germany);
138.159 Ensure adequate resources to respond to gender-based violence in line
with the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) (Iceland);
138.160 Continue efforts to strengthen measures to combat domestic and
gender-related violence (India);
138.161 Take further measures to combat violence against women and support
victims and survivors of such violence (Israel);
138.162 Continue its good efforts to address violence against women
(Kazakhstan);
138.163 Strengthen efforts to encourage the reporting of cases of violence
against women, and ensure the safety of women who come forward, that cases of
violence against women are thoroughly investigated and that perpetrators are
prosecuted and, if convicted, punished with appropriate sanctions
(Liechtenstein);
138.164 Provide victims of sexual and gender-based violence, in particular
those living in remote rural areas, with access to effective remedies and means of
protection and assistance, including to accommodation and shelters in all parts
of the country (Liechtenstein);
138.165 Allocate sufficient resources to effectively respond to gender-based
violence and increase the number of shelters and crisis centres, especially to those
in rural remote areas (Maldives);
138.166 Ensure that crimes of violence against women are effectively
investigated and prosecuted without undue delay (Malta);
A/HRC/52/9
20 GE.22-27755
138.167 Implement regional and international obligations addressing violence
against women, including by ensuring proper coordination between authorities
at the local, regional and national levels (Netherlands);
138.168 Continue efforts to combat domestic violence, including providing
support to victims of gender-based and “honour”
-based violence, and enhance
competence in preventing, and supporting victims of, female genital mutilation
(Norway);
138.169 Continue with actions to end domestic violence and violence against
women and to combat racial discrimination (Pakistan);
138.170 Strengthen efforts to prevent and combat the persistent problem of
violence against women and girls by facilitating access to effective remedies,
especially by victims in rural areas (Philippines);
138.171 Allocate sufficient resources in order to ensure the full implementation
of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence (Slovenia);
138.172 Given the high costs of the legal system, adopt pertinent measures to
ensure access to justice for victims of gender-based violence, as well as to provide
adequate resources to the prosecution office to be able to investigate these cases
(Spain);
138.173 Intensify decisive actions to end domestic violence as well as gender-
based violence (Turkmenistan);
138.174 Further strengthen current policies and initiatives aimed at protection
against domestic violence, gender-based violence and violence against women
(Ukraine);
138.175 Continue to focus on combating violence against women, particularly
intimate partner violence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland);
138.176 Expand access to safe houses and resources for victims of domestic and
gender-based violence, including for the Indigenous Sami people (Canada);
138.177 Continue efforts to prevent and eradicate violence against women and
children, including by increasing the resources available to the care network for
victims of sexual or gender-based violence (Uruguay);
138.178 Take measures to improve legislation in order to increase the
effectiveness of protecting women and children from violence (Belarus);
138.179 Ensure that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration
in all immigration decisions that affect them, including family reunification
procedures, in order to facilitate the reunification of children with their families
in a humane and expeditious manner (Uruguay);
138.180 Reform the immigration law, seeking to safeguard the best interests of
the child, put an end to the detention of minors, and facilitate family reunification
(Mexico);
138.181 Stop the detention of immigrant children and protect their rights
(China);
138.182 Ensure that children are not detained for immigration-related
purposes and explore alternatives to detention that are appropriate for their age
and specific circumstances (Islamic Republic of Iran);
138.183 Prohibit the detention of children in migration, by developing
alternatives to detention for children and their family members (Zambia);
138.184 Consider a general ban on the detention of minors (Philippines);
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 21
138.185 Prohibit the detention of children for breach of immigration law and
provide alternatives to detention (Sierra Leone);
138.186 Consider limiting the placement of children in alternative care and
giving priority to keeping them in the care of their families or returning them to
their families (Iraq);
138.187 Respect the rights of parents to raise and educate their children, in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Nigeria);
138.188 Prioritize efforts to keep children in, or return them to, the care of their
family and to ensure families’ access to forms of support in the caregiving role
(Poland);
138.189 Address the widespread sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of
children in care institutions (Syrian Arab Republic);
138.190 Actively promote the rights and the participation of persons with
disabilities in society, including in the labour market, and guarantee effective
legal protection against discrimination against persons with disabilities (Cuba);
138.191 Safeguard the diversity of cultural expressions, promote intercultural
and intracultural dialogue and support traditional practices and creative
productions by all persons in vulnerable situations, including persons with
disabilities (Cyprus);
138.192 Continue strengthening laws that will realize the full implementation
of the rights of persons living with disabilities (Eswatini);
138.193 Actively promote the participation of persons with disabilities in the
labour market (Gabon);
138.194 Ensure in law and in practice that workers with disabilities enjoy the
right to just and favourable conditions of work on equal basis with others
(Gambia);
138.195 Strongly consider repealing legislation that permits the sterilization of
women with intellectual disabilities (Greece);
138.196 Enhance its good efforts to increase women’s participation in the
public and private sectors and their representation at all levels, especially for
women with disabilities or ethnic minority backgrounds (Kazakhstan);
138.197 Make further progress in prohibiting discrimination against persons
with disabilities in all fields, including in the provision of government services
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
138.198 Improve access for persons with disabilities to public information and
transportation and ensure effective legal protection against discrimination and
exploitation in the labour market (United States of America);
138.199 Advance the principle of free, prior and informed consent in all laws,
and political as well as official decisions regarding the rights of the Sami people
(Germany);
138.200 Step up efforts to ensure the quality of life of the Sami people and the
Roma people; in particular, solve issues related to the return of land,
employability, salaries, stigmatization and others (Chile);
138.201 Protect the Sami culture and ensure that the Sami people have access
to social services in the Sami language (China);
138.202 Continue to implement actions to prevent exclusiveness
(Mozambique);
138.203 Pursue the efforts to protect the right of minorities, including adequate
access to goods and services (Lebanon);
A/HRC/52/9
22 GE.22-27755
138.204 Make progress on a gender identity law that recognizes the free
development of people, including children and adolescents, and that guarantees
their dignified treatment (Argentina);
138.205 Introduce legislation to allow legal gender affirmation for persons
under 18 (Canada) (Iceland);
138.206 Develop a comprehensive action plan for the protection of the
fundamental and human rights of LGBTQI+ persons and ensure sufficient
resources for its implementation (Iceland);
138.207 Establish a comprehensive action plan for the protection of the rights
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, and that the new
regulations on gender identity include the situation of minors (Spain);
138.208 Establish a comprehensive action plan for the protection of the rights
of LGBTQI+ persons, including the bodily integrity of intersex persons
(Netherlands);
138.209 Adopt measures to guarantee the physical integrity and bodily
autonomy of intersex people, and prohibit unnecessary medical procedures
without their free and informed consent (Mexico);
138.210 Respect intersex children’s right to self-determination and ban
unnecessary surgeries (Iceland); Respect intersex children’s right to self-
determination by introducing effective legal and other measures to prohibit
unnecessary surgeries (Israel);
138.211 Conclude the reforms so that the legal recognition of the gender
identity of transgender persons is based on self-determination, eliminating
requirements such as sterilization and medical treatment to change legal status
(Mexico);
138.212 Reform legislation to remove the requirement of infertility or
sterilization as a condition for the legal recognition of gender reassignment
(Australia);
138.213 Enable automatic co-parent recognition and recognition of trans
parenthood (Iceland);
138.214 Continue further efforts to ensure the rights of migrants (Uzbekistan);
138.215 Enhance efforts for the protection of the rights of migrants and
vulnerable groups (Pakistan);
138.216 Pay particular attention to the children of undocumented migrants
and unaccompanied minors (Congo);
138.217 Improve protection mechanisms for migrants, especially children and
adolescents, in accordance with international standards (Paraguay);
138.218 Undertake actions to promote access to employment for migrant
women and women of immigrant origin, without discrimination (Peru);
138.219 Effectively implement relevant laws and strategies that promote non-
discrimination and better integration of migrants into Finnish society
(Philippines);
138.220 Continue efforts to ensure the full protection of the rights of migrant
workers and immigrant groups vulnerable to exploitation (Poland);
138.221 Develop training programmes to enhance the capabilities of law
enforcement and security authorities in line with human rights principles on how
to deal with migrant children (Saudi Arabia);
138.222 Make further efforts to ensure the effectiveness of legal protection for
migrant workers, especially women migrant workers and seasonal migrant
workers in the agricultural and forestry sector, including by advancing its
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 23
employment law and complaint mechanism, and assisting victims in obtaining
appropriate redress (Thailand);
138.223 Take urgent and specific measures in order to remove obstacles that
remain regarding the rights of refugees and migrants to family reunion, in
addition to the September 2021 law on this issue (Togo);
138.224 Provide the necessary protection for asylum-seekers, ensuring their
access to legal aid, facilitating procedures for the family reunification of
immigrants, and providing them with social security (Egypt);
138.225 Remove legal, practical and financial obstacles to family reunification
for refugees and other beneficiaries of international protection (Montenegro);
138.226 Facilitate family reunion measures for refugees and other persons
under international protection, and limit legal, practical and financial barriers
to family reunion (Tunisia);
138.227 Amend the Aliens Act by reintroducing residence permits on
humanitarian grounds, by lifting income requirements for refugee family
reunification, and by ensuring that asylum-seekers have effective access to
affordable and quality health services (Portugal);
138.228 Guarantee the right of asylum-seekers to a fair asylum determination
process, as well as the non-immigration detention of children and families with
minors (Spain);
138.229 Take measures to improve the legal assistance provided to asylum-
seekers (Mozambique);
139. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/52/9
24 GE.22-27755
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Finland was headed by H.E. Mr. Pekka HAAVISTO, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and composed of the following members:
• Ms. Kirsti KAUPPI, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of
Finland, Geneva;
• Ms. Johanna SUURPÄÄ, Director General; Ministry of Justice;
• Mr. Erik LUNDBERG, Deputy Director General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs;
• Ms. Tarja KANGASKORTE, Director, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Johanna LUKKARILA, Diplomatic Adviser to the Minister, Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Laila CLYNE, Diplomatic Adviser to the Minister, Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Finland;
• Ms. Janina HASENSON, Legal Counsellor, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Ann-Mari FRÖBERG, Counsellor, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Suvi TUOMINEN, Counsellor, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Mia SPOLANDER, Legal Officer, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Johanna HOSSA, Legal Officer, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland;
• Ms. Hanna RÖNTY, Senior Specialist, Ministry of Justice;
• Mr. Jouko HUHTAMÄKI, Ministerial Adviser, Ministry of the Interior;
• Ms. Emma PATOVUORI, Senior Specialist, Ministry of the Interior;
• Mr. Timo TUURIHALME, Senior Officer for Legal Affairs, Ministry of Defence;
• Ms. Anna MIKANDER, Councillor of Education, Ministry of Education and Culture;
• Mr. Tuomas KAIVOLA, Senior Ministerial Adviser, Legislative Affairs, Ministry of
Transport and Communications;
• Ms. Anna BRUUN, Ministerial Adviser, Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Employment;
• Ms. Jenna UUSITALO, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Social Affairs and Health;
• Ms Karin CEDERLÖF, Specialist, Ministry of the Environment;
• Ms. Anu KONTTINEN, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of
Finland, Geneva;
• Ms. Marjatta HIEKKA, Legal Counsellor, Special Adviser (Human Rights),
Permanent Mission of Finland, Geneva;
• Ms. Karoliina HEIKINHEIMO-PÉREZ, First Secretary (Human Rights), Permanent
Mission of Finland, Geneva;
• Ms. Katja FOKIN, Legal Officer (Human Rights), Permanent Mission of Finland,
Geneva;
• Ms. Karin BACKMAN, Adviser (Human Rights), Permanent Mission of Finland,
Geneva;
• Ms. Sissi MIETTINEN, Intern, Permanent Mission of Finland, Geneva;
• Ms. Elisa VUORILEHTO, Intern, Permanent Mission of Finland, Geneva;
• Mr. Mikko KINNUNEN, Member of Parliament, Constitutional Law Committee;
A/HRC/52/9
GE.22-27755 25
• Mr. Yrjö MATTILA, Member of the Human Rights Delegation;
• Mr. Krister KARTTUNEN, Member of the Advisory Board for Human Rights.
