GE.21-00098(E)
Human Rights Council
Forty-sixth session
22 February–19 March 2021
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Libya
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/46/17
General Assembly Distr.: General
5 January 2021
Original: English
A/HRC/46/17
2
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its thirty-sixth session from 2 to 13 November
2020. The review of Libya was held at the 15th meeting, on 11 November 2020. The
delegation of Libya was headed by the Minister of Justice, Mohamed A. Lamlom. At its 19th
meeting, held on 13 November 2020, the Working Group adopted the report on Libya.
2. On 14 January 2020, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Libya: Czechia, Italy and Namibia.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution
5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Libya:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/36/LBY/1 and Corr.1);
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b)
(A/HRC/WG.6/36/LBY/2);
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c)
(A/HRC/WG.6/36/LBY/3).
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, Germany, the
Netherlands, Portugal, on behalf of the Group of Friends on national mechanisms for
implementation, reporting and follow-up, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and Uruguay was transmitted to Libya through the troika. The questions are available
on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The Permanent Representative of Libya to the United Nations office and other
organizations in Geneva, Tamim Baiou, expressed his appreciation to the members of the
Human Rights Council, the troika and the civil society organizations who had contributed to
the review of Libya and introduced his country’s delegation.
6. The Minister of Justice, Mohamed Lamlom, stated that Libya had attached great
importance to the review process, realizing that respect for human rights was no longer a
purely national matter that pertained to each country, but was rather a matter of global
interest.
7. Since the previous review cycle, the country had faced many challenges, from political
and institutional division to armed conflict, as the Government of National Accord was forced
to fight a fierce war against Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, which had taken control of
the city of Sirte and which the Government had succeeded in eradicating, at great cost to the
population.
8. On 4 April 2019, Tripoli and the surrounding area were subjected to an armed attack,
which lasted over a year, resulting in hundreds of casualties, mass damage to public and
private infrastructure and the displacement of hundreds of thousands of people, as well as
adversely affecting the Government’s ability to ensure respect for human rights .
9. The political divisions had undermined the Government’s control over the eastern part
of the country and compromised reforms relating to human rights, treaty ratification and
legislative action.
10. The Minister stated that it was painful to undergo the review of Libya before the
Council at a time when human rights violations were increasing, especially in areas not under
the authority of the Government of National Accord. He recalled the kidnapping of the
A/HRC/46/17
3
member of the House of Representatives, Seham Sergiwa, from her home in Benghazi over
a year ago and expressed shock about the assassination of human rights activist Hanan Al-
Barassi, who had been killed in Benghazi the day prior to the interactive dialogue.
11. The Constitution drafting committee had completed a draft constitution on 29 July
2017 and referred it to the House of Representatives, which in turn had issued the
Constitutional Referendum Law No. 2018/6, and the draft constitution had been referred to
the High Electoral Commission on January 2019. Nonetheless, the attack on the capital had
prevented the completion of the constitutional reform.
12. The Transitional Justice Law was aimed at eliminating accumulated grievances,
paving the way for reconciliation and addressing the causes of violations so as to guarantee
their non-recurrence. The judicial system aimed to offer all the guarantees required for a fair
trial. In the light of the attack on the capital, the Government of National Accord had
established a joint committee in 2019 to monitor and document human rights violations. The
committee had submitted three reports documenting allegations of violations committed
since the attack on the capital in April 2019.
13. In an effort to fight impunity, the Government of National Accord had called for the
creation of an international fact-finding mission to look into alleged violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law committed in Libya. Furthermore, the
Government had continued to cooperate closely with the International Criminal Court, as
highlighted by the Prosecutor of the Court in her briefings to the Security Council.
14. The Constitution guaranteed the right to freedom of expression and criminalized all
forms of enforced disappearance. Recent legislation had aggravated the punishment for
enforced disappearances, especially when committed by persons employed by the
Government.
15. The Government had conducted a comprehensive review of the conditions of
detention for detainees in prisons and detention centres, resulting in the release of hundreds
of detainees. The Ministry of Justice had launched a comprehensive programme aimed at
improving detention conditions and providing health care to inmates in an effort to comply
with international standards.
16. The Government had established a unit to support and empower women within the
Presidential Council and all ministries. As a result, the representation of women in judicial
positions had exceeded 40 per cent and the presence of women in university education had
exceeded that of men. Equally of note, the proportion of women working in the public sector
had exceeded 50 per cent.
17. The Government had launched campaigns to fight violence against women.
Specialized units for women and children had been created throughout security directorates,
and the Supreme Judicial Council had decided to establish two specialized chambers to look
into cases of violence against women. The Constitution criminalized violence against women
and the penalties were aggravated when applied to domestic violence.
18. Libya was a party to most of the basic international and regional human rights treaties
and had made efforts to align national legislation with international human rights law. The
Presidential Council had expressed its agreement to accede to the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Although Libya had not ratified the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, it had been fully cooperating with it.
19. As for the establishment of a national human rights mechanism in accordance with
the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights (the Paris Principles), in 2011, the National Transitional Council had
established the National Council for Public Freedom and Human Rights. It was mandated to
operate independently and was not subject to government supervision.
A/HRC/46/17
4
20. In 2019, the National Committee for International Humanitarian Law was reactivated
on the basis of a proposal of the Ministry of Justice to align national law with international
humanitarian law.
21. Libya was the subject of wide-scale irregular migration and hosted over 1 million
illegal migrants. Libya had adopted a policy of non-forced deportation of irregular migrants
and as such had been cooperating with the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
in order to facilitate their voluntary return.
22. The Government had worked to dismantle trafficking in persons and illegal
immigration networks. Perpetrators of trafficking in persons were being prosecuted in
accordance with the recommendations of the Security Council sanctions committees,
including the imposition of travel bans and asset freezes.
23. The Government had continued its endeavours to fulfil its obligations towards
improving economic conditions for citizens, as well as increasing access to education, health
care, work and a decent standard of living. That had proven challenging in the light of the
closure of oil fields and ports, which provided the main source of income in Libya.
24. The Government had also launched a plan to support the public health sector by
allocating over $3.5 billion in support in 2019 and had established a fund, in 2019, which
would help to provide health insurance for all citizens.
25. To confront the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Government had
established an emergency committee and had allocated funds from the budget. It had set up
health isolation centres in all municipalities and had provided all that was required to ensure
the containment of the pandemic and mitigate its effects .
26. Concerning the fight against corruption, the Government had established a team of
experts to combat corruption in accordance with the requirements of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, to which Libya had become a party in 2005. Libya had been
one of the first 40 countries to fulfil the requirements stipulated by the Convention.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
27. During the interactive dialogue, 109 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
28. South Sudan congratulated Libya for its efforts to improve human rights and
engagement with international mechanisms.
29. Spain welcomed the political dialogue of Libya and the ceasefire agreement.
30. Sri Lanka commended the engagement of Libya with human rights mechanisms and
its efforts to provide free health-care facilities.
31. The State of Palestine commended the efforts of Libya to promote human rights, as
well as its commitment to implementing previous recommendations.
32. The Sudan commended Libya for upholding its commitments, despite the difficult
circumstances faced by the country.
33. Switzerland welcomed the recent conclusion of a permanent ceasefire agreement.
34. Thailand commended Libya for the ceasefire agreement and its efforts to combat
violence against women; it remained concerned however by the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic.
35. Timor-Leste acknowledged measures on migrants’ rights, including the migrant
registration system.
36. Togo urged all parties to respect the ceasefire agreement to improve the humanitarian
and human rights situation.
37. Tunisia commended Libya for the ceasefire agreement and welcomed the holding of
the conference in Tunisia, with a view to restoring stability.
A/HRC/46/17
5
38. Turkey highlighted the human rights violations committed by Haftar militia, urging
the International Criminal Court to investigate them. Turkey reiterated its will to assist
towards peace in Libya and called upon the international community to support the
Government of National Accord.
39. Uganda encouraged peace efforts and full socioeconomic recovery. It expressed
concern about migrants, asylum seekers and trafficking in persons.
40. Ukraine highlighted the recently signed ceasefire agreement, urged Libya to guarantee
education for persons with disabilities and expressed concern about gaps in the area of
women’s rights protection.
41. The United Kingdom expressed grave concern about the deteriorating human rights
situation. It urged the Government to do its part to commit to implementing the ceasefire and
to the United Nations-led political process.
42. The United States of America expressed concern about assassinations and abductions
of activists, the massacre of migrants in Mizda and the use of child soldiers.
43. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela denounced the serious impact of foreign
military aggression on Libya and urged for long-lasting peace solutions in line with
international law. It urged the international community to cooperate with Libya and provide
humanitarian assistance.
44. Viet Nam commended Libya for its commitment to an inclusive human rights-based
approach.
45. Yemen commended Libya for the steps that it had taken to enhance the human rights
situation, in particular the national reconciliation efforts.
46. The delegation of Libya stated that its Constitution and laws promoted the role of
women in society. It has taken significant measures to dismantle networks for trafficking in
persons and illegal migration networks.
47. The delegation stated that its laws and Constitution prohibited torture and that its
Government would provide full support and cooperation to the fact-finding mission.
48. The President of the Government of National Accord announced the Government’s
readiness to accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance.
49. Zambia made recommendations.
50. Zimbabwe noted the continuing implementation by Libya of policies for education for
all at all levels and its provision free health-care services.
51. Afghanistan welcomed the ceasefire agreement and the ratification of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
52. Algeria praised the efforts of Libya to combat the humanitarian challenges it faced
and promote human rights, despite the ongoing armed conflict.
53. Angola appreciated the commitment of Libya as a member of the Human Rights
Council and its constructive cooperation with the various mechanisms of the Council.
54. Argentina welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
55. Australia welcomed the ceasefire agreement, urging Libya to redouble efforts to
ensure the full and effective participation of women in the political process.
56. Austria welcomed the agreement on a permanent ceasefire facilitated by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
57. Azerbaijan welcomed the efforts to protect the rights to education, health and work
and the rights of persons with disabilities.
58. Bahrain applauded the efforts of Libya to combat illegal migration by adopting
effective national policies.
A/HRC/46/17
6
59. Bangladesh commended Libya for initiating the drafting of a permanent constitution
aimed at achieving political stability, as well as the efforts to achieve gender parity in
education.
60. Belgium remained deeply concerned about the scale of violations of international
humanitarian law and the lack of accountability.
61. Botswana welcomed the ceasefire agreement. It encouraged Libya to protect refugees,
migrants, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons.
62. Brazil welcomed the permanent and nationwide ceasefire agreement.
63. Burkina Faso expressed concern about the persistent discrimination against migrants
and asylum seekers.
64. Burundi welcomed the permanent ceasefire agreement, as well as efforts to improve
the administration of justice and access to basic health-care services and education for all.
65. Canada welcomed efforts to track and monitor human rights violations, while
expressing deep concern about the overall human rights situation in Libya.
66. Chad welcomed the enacting by Libya of legislation to implement the supported
recommendations made in the context of the previous universal periodic review cycle.
67. In response to comments, the Libyan delegation reiterated that the country’s
legislation criminalized violence against women. The public prosecutor’s office had
continued to investigate allegations of human rights violations and international humanitarian
law and cases of enforced disappearances.
68. The Libyan delegation stated that, since the collapse of the Gaddafi regime in 2011,
Libya had seen a proliferation of civil society organizations, and it denied cracking down on
civil society, which had been working freely and without any kind of restriction.
69. Concerning migrants, Libya had adopted a number of measures and decisions, such
as Law No. 19 of 2010, aggravating the penalty for perpetrators of violations against
migrants. It had cooperated with the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) to disintegrate networks for trafficking in persons. In cooperating
with IOM and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the Government had strived to eliminate obstacles to migrants’ rights.
70. Chile welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the efforts to protect the rights to health and education and promote the
empowerment of women.
71. China welcomed the efforts to protect the rights to health and education and to combat
violence against women. It also welcomed the ceasefire agreement.
72. Costa Rica thanked Libya for the presentation of its national report.
73. Côte d’Ivoire noted that the human rights situation had progressively deteriorated.
74. Croatia expressed concern about the cases of torture, arbitrary detention, extrajudicial
killing and enforced disappearance.
75. Cyprus welcomed the ceasefire agreement of 23 October 2020 and looked forward to
a successful political dialogue forum.
76. Czechia noted that recommendations it had provided during the previous review cycle
had not been fully implemented.
77. Denmark commended Libya for the signing of the ceasefire agreement. It expressed
concern about the human rights situation of migrants.
78. Djibouti stated that the protracted conflict had led to a worsening of the humanitarian
situation, an escalation of violence and a massive displacement of the population.
79. Ecuador acknowledged the progress made in the protection of human rights, in
particular the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
A/HRC/46/17
7
80. Egypt remained concerned about the security situation confronting Libya, while
acknowledging the best efforts of the Government and its institutions.
81. Estonia stated that the human rights situation had not improved since the previous
review cycle.
82. Ethiopia commended Libya for its commitment to engaging with the human rights
mechanisms, regardless of its challenges.
83. Fiji commended Libya for its efforts to protect human rights, despite the many
challenges it had faced.
84. Finland welcomed the engagement by Libya in the universal periodic review process.
85. France thanked Libya for the presentation of its report and made recommendations.
86. Georgia noted the formation of a joint commission in 2019, mandated to cover and
report on all human rights violations.
87. Germany expressed concern about the human rights situation and reiterated that all
parties to the conflict had a responsibility to uphold human rights.
88. Ghana noted the efforts by Libya to implement recommendations from the previous
review cycle.
89. Greece welcomed the delegation of Libya and made recommendations.
90. The Holy See was concerned about the deteriorating conditions for the enjoyment of
human rights and the protection of vulnerable people.
91. Iceland expressed support for the establishment of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya and underlined the importance of the cooperation of Libya with it.
92. India commended Libya for its cooperation with the United Nations mechanisms and
its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
93. Indonesia supported the immediate cessation of hostilities and the convening of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum to discuss its future.
94. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended Libya for the achievements in combating
trafficking in persons and efforts to protect and promote women’s rights.
95. Iraq praised Libya for its efforts to achieve national reconciliation and conflict
resolution, as well as for promoting human rights.
96. Ireland welcomed the agreement for a permanent ceasefire and expressed concern
about impunity for human rights violations.
97. Italy welcomed the establishment of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
and encouraged Libya to further protect human rights.
98. Japan commended Libya for its continued cooperation with OHCHR and its
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
99. Jordan expressed support to Libya in its reconciliation efforts and conflict resolution
process to ensure its sovereignty, security and stability.
100. Kenya noted the efforts made to improve the political situation, enhance transitional
justice and national reconciliation and promote individual rights.
101. Kuwait praised the efforts of Libya to promote human rights, in particular the rights
to education, health and work.
102. Latvia noted the steps taken since the previous universal periodic review cycle and
encouraged further efforts in fulfilling its human rights obligations.
103. Lebanon commended the efforts of Libya to promote human rights and expressed the
hope for a successful reconciliation process in Libya.
104. Lesotho commended Libya for promoting the right to health by providing free health-
care services in facilities across the country.
A/HRC/46/17
8
105. Liechtenstein welcomed the engagement of Libya with the international human rights
community, in particular its support for the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya.
106. Malaysia welcomed the ceasefire agreement and noted efforts to provide accessible
education and achieve gender parity in the education sector.
107. Maldives commended Libya for its efforts to create job opportunities by focusing on
youth employment programmes and its collaboration with the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF).
108. Mali appreciated the commitment of Libya to guarantee free education at all levels of
education and the budgetary efforts in that regard.
109. Malta commended Libya for its cooperation with the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya and its engagement with UNSMIL to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict.
110. Mauritania praised the positive efforts by Libya to engage with the United Nations
human rights mechanisms during the reporting period.
111. Mauritius congratulated Libya for ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.
112. Mexico made recommendations.
113. Montenegro welcomed the close cooperation of Libya with UNSMIL and was pleased
to note that Libya was a party to almost all the major human rights treaties.
114. Morocco welcomed the efforts of Libya to promote human rights and encouraged the
international community to support the national reconciliation Government.
115. Myanmar appreciated efforts to implement the recommendations made during the
previous cycle, despite the prevailing challenges in the country.
116. Namibia noted that, despite the complex security and other challenges faced, Libya
continued to promote measures aimed at improving human rights.
117. Nepal commended actions taken to empower women and promote their participation
in political, economic and public life.
118. The Netherlands stressed that the implementation of the recent ceasefire agreement
needed to be prioritized by all parties.
119. The Niger remained concerned about the allegations of human rights violations of
migrants in detention centres beyond the control of the Government.
120. Nigeria welcomed efforts to protect the rights of women, ensure access to education
and health and achieve national reconciliation.
121. In response to comments, the Libyan delegation stated that a presidential decision had
been adopted to facilitate the return of internally displaced persons in the western and
southern parts of Libya after the 2014 conflict, to realize regional reconciliation and to open
roads between the different regions. A presidential decree had also been adopted establishing
a fund for remedy and rehabilitation for displaced persons.
122. Norway noted with regret that the human rights situation in Libya had deteriorated
since the previous review cycle.
123. Oman commended Libya for the participatory approach adopted in preparing the
report and the efforts made to promote human rights and national reconciliation.
124. Pakistan noted the efforts of Libya to promote human rights, finalize the constitution
and ensure transitional justice, despite the challenging conflict.
125. Panama thanked Libya for the presentation of its national report.
126. Peru expressed its wish that the current universal periodic review cycle would
contribute to the improvement of human rights in Libya.
A/HRC/46/17
9
127. The Philippines commended Libya for the ratification of the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities and welcomed the Government’s cooperation with the Human
Rights Council and OHCHR for technical assistance and capacity-building.
128. Poland urged all actors to take steps that would result in finding a political solution in
Libya.
129. Portugal welcomed the recent steps agreed upon in order to find a political solution to
the conflict.
130. Qatar praised the efforts of Libya to implement the recommendations made in the
context of the previous universal periodic review cycle, despite the challenging conflict in
the country.
131. The Republic of Korea commended Libya for the protection of the rights of women
and children affected by the conflict.
132. The Russian Federation remained concerned about the presence of unlawful armed
groups and trafficking in persons, despite the best efforts of Libya.
133. Rwanda took note with appreciation of the efforts made by Libya to promote human
rights, despite the security challenges in the country.
134. Saudi Arabia commended Libya for its efforts to protect human rights and its
engagement with human rights mechanisms, despite the ongoing conflict.
135. Senegal encouraged Libya to consolidate the legislative, judicial, administrative and
budgetary frameworks relating to human rights.
136. Sierra Leone commended Libya for the launch of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
but expressed concern about the violations perpetrated against African migrants.
137. Singapore commended Libya for its commitment to ensuring the right to education
and to guaranteeing quality health services for all.
138. Slovakia commended Libya for its resumption of the political process, which raised
hopes for an improved human rights situation.
139. Slovenia commended Libya for its commitment to combating irregular migration, but
expressed concern about the absence of a national asylum law.
140. Somalia congratulated Libya for the ceasefire agreement that had been reached and
expressed the hope that it would bring peace.
141. South Africa praised the efforts of Libya to achieve political solutions and advance
national reconciliation.
142. The delegation of Libya stated that it had cooperated with the United Nations human
rights mechanisms, in particular with the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances and the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families.
143. Concerning the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, the
legislation of Libya remained compatible with the provisions of the Optional Protocol. The
Government only applied the death penalty for the most serious crimes and ensured due
process.
144. Women’s empowerment units had been established in various areas, and awareness-
raising campaigns had been organized on gender equality. The Government forged a
partnership between the psychiatry units and civil society in order to tackle issues such as
depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and marital violence and offered psychological
support to women. The Government had passed a law in 2013 concerning the payment of
pensions for women.
145. Libya had ratified the African Charter on the Rights and the Welfare of the Child, the
Charter on the Rights of the Arab Child, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
A/HRC/46/17
10
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.
146. The Government had set up a unit to investigate enforced disappearances working in
cooperation with the international commission that had been established to follow up on cases
of enforced disappearance. Over 50 Libyan experts were currently working to investigate
cases of enforced disappearance, in particular by examining human remains in mass graves.
The authorities had been working in cooperation with the International Criminal Court in
Libya, benefiting from their support and expertise. A notification system had been set up to
inform authorities of cases of missing persons.
147. The delegation concluded by stating that the aggression against Tripoli, and the
international community’s reluctance to address it decisively, had hampered the
Government’s efforts to promote and protect human rights.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
148. The following recommendations will be examined by Libya, which will provide
responses in due time, but no later than the forty-sixth session of the Human Rights
Council:
148.1 Consider ratifying all outstanding international human rights
instruments and update domestic legislation to bring it in line with the
international treaties (South Africa);
148.2 Consider the ratification of international human rights instruments to
which it is not yet a party and improve cooperation with human rights
mechanisms (Costa Rica);
148.3 Strengthen its collaboration with the international community to bring
lasting peace and development to the country (Ethiopia);
148.4 Intensify efforts to ratify all conventions and protocols mentioned in
the recommendations accepted during the previous universal periodic review
cycle (Morocco);
148.5 Ratify and strictly implement the Arms Trade Treaty without delay
(Namibia);
148.6 Implement the declarations provided for articles 76 and 77 of the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families (South Sudan);
148.7 Facilitate unfettered access for and cooperate fully with the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, throughout Libya (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
148.8 Provide access for the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya to
credibly investigate human rights abuses and violations, including to the mass
graves in Tarhunah, and hold those responsible accountable (United States of
America);
148.9 Cooperate with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to reinforce the technical assistance that the State is in need
of, in terms of protecting human rights, as per its request (Algeria);
148.10 Continue cooperating with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and with the different mechanisms of the United Nations and the
international community for the definitive ceasefire (Chile);
148.11 Ensure full access to the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
and actively cooperate with the International Criminal Court and provide the
Court with assistance in the execution of pending warrants (Costa Rica);
A/HRC/46/17
11
148.12 Cooperate with the Independent Fact-Finding Missions on Libya,
which was set up pursuant to resolution 43/39 of the Human Rights Council, and
provide it with all necessary facilitation (Sudan);
148.13 Guarantee full cooperation with the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya established by the Human Rights Council (Germany);
148.14 Cooperate fully with the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya,
by granting it full and unimpeded access to the Libyan territory in order to
ensure that all serious violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law can be documented and the perpetrators
brought to justice (Switzerland);
148.15 Provide unrestricted access to the entire territory to members of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya established by the Human Rights
Council in June 2020 (Luxembourg);
148.16 Cooperate with the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
established by the Human Rights Council and facilitate its work (Maldives);
148.17 Cooperate fully with the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya
established by the Human Rights Council, as well as with the International
Criminal Court (Norway);
148.18 Draw on the support of the international community and the relevant
United Nations mechanisms to reinforce and protect human rights (Qatar);
148.19 Implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
in particular article 11 related to the protection of people with disabilities during
armed conflict (South Sudan);
148.20 Accede to and ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, among others
(Kenya);
148.21 Take steps to accede to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Oman);
148.22 Take further steps to enhance measures to implement the country’s
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(Philippines);
148.23 Continue to incorporate the provisions of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment into
national legislation (Russian Federation);
148.24 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Chile) (Cyprus)
(Denmark) (Estonia) (Togo) (Somalia);
148.25 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Second
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Ukraine);
148.26 Continue efforts to ensure the ratification of outstanding international
treaties and protocols, including the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(Ghana);
148.27 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(Honduras);
A/HRC/46/17
12
148.28 Consider accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(Mauritania);
148.29 Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Tunisia);
148.30 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Senegal) (Chile) (Japan) (Lesotho) (Germany)
(Somalia) (Slovakia);
148.31 Consider acceding to the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina);
148.32 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance before the next universal periodic review cycle
and ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the Protocol
thereto (Czechia);
148.33 Ratify or accede to human rights instruments to which it is not yet a
party, especially the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (Ecuador);
148.34 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (France);
148.35 Follow-up on its commitment to ratify the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Greece);
148.36 Sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Honduras);
148.37 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda)
(Croatia) (Namibia) (Slovakia);
148.38 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and
consider establishing a moratorium on executions as a first step towards the
official abolition of the death penalty (Argentina);
148.39 Abolish the death penalty and accede to the Second Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the
abolition of the death penalty (Australia);
148.40 Sign and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death
penalty (Honduras);
148.41 Fully abolish the death penalty and implement the Second Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at
the abolition of the death penalty (Iceland);
148.42 Introduce a de jure moratorium on capital executions, with a view to
fully abolishing the death penalty, and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty (Italy);
148.43 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to its
eventual abolition, and consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty (Latvia);
A/HRC/46/17
13
148.44 Ratify and fully align national legislation with the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and cooperate fully with the Court, in accordance
with its legal obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions, including
by assisting with its proceedings and complying with its rulings (Austria);
148.45 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, with the
aim of fighting impunity (Croatia);
148.46 Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(Cyprus) (Italy);
148.47 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court (Estonia);
148.48 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
cooperate fully with the Court and respect its decisions (France);
148.49 Sign and ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(Honduras);
148.50 Establish a fully independent judicial mechanism to investigate,
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of war crimes and other human rights
violations, such as the torture and ill-treatment of detainees, and cooperate fully
with the International Criminal Court (Ireland);
148.51 Ratify and fully align its national legislation with all the obligations
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Latvia);
148.52 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in its 2010
version as well as the Amendments to the Rome Statute on the crime of
aggression (Liechtenstein);
148.53 Fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court and ratify the
Rome Statute of the Court (Luxembourg);
148.54 Take all necessary measures to fight impunity and develop a
comprehensive agenda on transitional justice and accountability, including by
acceding to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully
cooperating with its investigation (Netherlands);
148.55 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Arms
Trade Treaty, the Convention on Cluster Munitions and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction (Panama);
148.56 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court (Poland);
148.57 Sign the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the Protocol
relating to the Status of Refugees (Slovenia);
148.58 Consider ratifying the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and the Protocol thereto (Botswana) (Côte d’Ivoire) (Montenegro);
148.59 Ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
strengthen its cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to address the situation of migrants in
detention (Brazil);
148.60 Ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
Protocol thereto and ensure the protection of the rights of refugees and asylum
seekers, as well as other migrants and internally displaced persons (Germany);
148.61 Take immediate measures to adopt asylum legislation, end the practice
of arbitrary and indefinite detention of all migrants and accede to the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the Protocol thereto (Ireland);
A/HRC/46/17
14
148.62 Accede to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the
Protocol thereto and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Italy);
148.63 Remove all reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (Rwanda);
148.64 Lift all reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women (Greece);
148.65 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia);
148.66 Ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (Honduras);
148.67 Call upon all parties in Libya to renew their commitment to the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum, in cooperation with the United Nations (Sierra Leone);
148.68 Adopt laws regulating the work of the civil society (Ukraine);
148.69 Continue efforts towards the reform and reinforcement of human
rights (Yemen);
148.70 Adopt a law that clearly defines international crimes and ensure that
its effect is retroactive, to include crimes committed in 2011 onwards (Zambia);
148.71 Support national reconciliation, the return of refugees to their States
and the national dialogue between the Libyan parties (Algeria);
148.72 Unify legislative and executive institutions in the light of national
reconciliation (Algeria);
148.73 Adopt appropriate measures to fight corruption and limit the leakage
of illicit financial flows abroad (Angola);
148.74 Repeal the 2001 Law regulating civil associations and the related
decree and issue a new statute protecting freedom of association consistent with
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Australia);
148.75 Continue efforts for its stability, institution-building and the
promotion and protection of human rights, with support and assistance from the
international community (Bangladesh);
148.76 Promote a political settlement process on the basis of the ceasefire
agreement so as to restore stability and development as early as possible (China);
148.77 Cooperate with civil society organizations and non-governmental
organizations that are concerned with human rights at the national and
international levels (State of Palestine);
148.78 Continue the dialogue and efforts to end the conflict and create the
necessary conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population (Djibouti);
148.79 Provide the necessary training to law enforcement officers on
protecting and promoting human rights (Egypt);
148.80 Review the Penal Code, the Terrorism Law, the Civic Associations
Law and the Publications Law, as a restrictive legal framework on freedom of
expression, as well as freedom of assembly and association, and bring it into line
with international standards (Estonia);
148.81 Commit to implementing Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) by
adopting a relevant national action plan (Greece);
148.82 Lift restrictions hindering civil society organizations and their
activities and guarantee their independence, in particular by repealing
Presidential Decree No. 286 and all similar decrees (Switzerland);
A/HRC/46/17
15
148.83 Promote good governance by enhancing capacity-building for officials
in all branches of government (Indonesia);
148.84 Continue to implement human rights training and capacity-building
programmes for the national institutions concerned with human rights, in
cooperation with the United Nations and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (Jordan);
148.85 Unify legislative and executive institutions (Kuwait);
148.86 Increase cooperation with civil society and non-governmental
organizations concerned with human rights at the national and international
levels (Kuwait);
148.87 Continue its efforts for eliminating violence against women, especially
migrant women by, inter alia, effectively implementing the national plan entitled
“Together to end violence against women” (Thailand);
148.88 Continue to enhance national reconciliation and Libya-Libya dialogue
(Mauritania);
148.89 Take adequate measures to ensure the safety of the most vulnerable
groups, including human rights defenders, journalists, women, children,
internally displaced persons, migrants and refugees, and that those responsible
for violence against them are held accountable (Netherlands);
148.90 Sustain efforts aimed at national reconciliation and seek necessary
international support to enhance its capacity to protect human rights (Nigeria);
148.91 Continue efforts for national reconciliation and cooperate with
credible initiatives aimed at ending the state of division (Oman);
148.92 Make progress with the arrangements for a national referendum
(Oman);
148.93 Continue to make efforts to ensure peace and stability, to hold
parliamentary and presidential elections and to unify State institutions
(Pakistan);
148.94 Establish a national strategy for an effective and coordinated response
to internal displacement across institutions and levels of government (Republic
of Korea);
148.95 Take effective steps to establish a national human rights institution in
line with the Paris Principles (India);
148.96 Work towards establishing a national human rights institution,
including by exploring support through bilateral and regional cooperation
(Indonesia);
148.97 End all discrimination against women and address child and forced
marriage (Sierra Leone);
148.98 Adopt a law against all forms of discrimination in order to prevent and
address violence and discrimination on any grounds, including religion, and hold
perpetrators of violent acts to account (Slovakia);
148.99 Strengthen legislative and administrative measures on all forms of
discrimination, in particular racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance (South Africa);
148.100 Adopt a law against all forms of discrimination (Ukraine);
148.101 Promote a law against all forms of discrimination, in particular racism,
racial discrimination, discrimination based on gender and xenophobia and
related intolerance (Argentina);
A/HRC/46/17
16
148.102 Redouble efforts to combat discrimination against women and against
migrant workers belonging to religious minorities, in particular Christians,
including through legislative reforms and awareness-raising campaigns (Brazil);
148.103 Take all necessary measures to end racial discrimination against
migrants and asylum seekers from sub-Saharan Africa (Burkina Faso);
148.104 Take steps to combat all discrimination based on race and xenophobia
(Côte d’Ivoire);
148.105 Amend legislation so as to allow Libyan women to pass on their
nationality to their children (Cyprus);
148.106 Recognize the nationality of the children of Libyan women married to
foreigners and ensure equal access to education and social benefits (Ecuador);
148.107 Review all laws and practices that are discriminatory based on gender
and that limit the participation of women in political processes and social life
(Estonia);
148.108 Decriminalize consensual sexual relations between adults of the same
sex and expand its anti-discrimination legislation to include a prohibition of
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity (Iceland);
148.109 Adopt laws to fully end all forms of discrimination based on gender or
religion, racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia and related intolerance,
especially against migrant workers (Kenya);
148.110 Enhance progress made in the framework of realizing economic and
social rights for all Libyans, empowering women and supporting gender equality
(Tunisia);
148.111 Make efforts to publicize and realize the right to development (Viet
Nam);
148.112 Continue strengthening efforts to guarantee economic, social and
cultural rights (Azerbaijan);
148.113 Promote economic and social development in a safe environment to
safeguard people’s economic, social and cultural rights (China);
148.114 Ensure that women, children, persons with disabilities and members
of indigenous and local communities are meaningfully engaged in the
development and implementation of climate change and disaster risk reduction
policies (Fiji);
148.115 Continue its efforts to eliminate all causes of the armed conflict in the
country (Islamic Republic of Iran);
148.116 Enhance the ongoing efforts to deliver basic public services, such as in
the electricity and water sectors, to all areas, in particular rural areas (Islamic
Republic of Iran);
148.117 Intensify efforts to fully ensure the right to development (Iraq);
148.118 Continue the ongoing efforts to develop the basic services of electricity
and water (Maldives);
148.119 Pursue efforts to ensure all economic, social and cultural rights,
through the compliance of the Government’s regulatory measures with national
legislation (Morocco);
148.120 Sustain efforts aimed at achieving socioeconomic development
(Pakistan);
148.121 Intensify measures to improve the penitentiary system (Russian
Federation);
148.122 Guarantee dignified conditions of detention (Zambia);
A/HRC/46/17
17
148.123 Protect the human rights of detainees in line with international
standards (Austria);
148.124 Establish a comprehensive mechanism to monitor the location and
legal status of detainees in Libya and ensure that all detainees are provided with
adequate care and rehabilitation (Canada);
148.125 Ensure respect for and the promotion of human rights while
countering terrorism and address its negative impacts on human rights and
fundamental freedoms (Egypt);
148.126 Take further measures to bring an end to the practice of arbitrary
arrest, detention and imprisonment by establishing due process of law (Japan);
148.127 Redouble efforts to reveal the fate of the enforced disappeared and the
missing persons from during the predecessor regime, in particular the Lebanese
Imam Moussa al-Sadr and his companions (Lebanon);
148.128 Continue efforts to put an end to arbitrary detention and improve
conditions in detention facilities (Lebanon);
148.129 Establish an official moratorium on executions and immediately
commute all death sentences to terms of imprisonment (Slovakia);
148.130 Establish an immediate moratorium on executions (Belgium);
148.131 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to its
abolition (Costa Rica);
148.132 Formalize a moratorium on the use of the death penalty (Cyprus);
148.133 Declare a moratorium on executions, with a view to the permanent
abolition of the death penalty for all crimes, and ratify the Second Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at
the abolition of the death penalty (France);
148.134 Consider a moratorium on the application of the death penalty, with a
view to its permanent abolition (Holy See);
148.135 Take effective steps to abolish the death penalty (Liechtenstein);
148.136 Consider commuting all current death penalty sentences to other
forms of punishment (Namibia);
148.137 Adopt an immediate moratorium on executions, with a view to the
abolition of the death penalty (Portugal);
148.138 Maintain respect of due process, in accordance with article 14 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (South Sudan);
148.139 Continue the efforts made to support the process of transitional justice
and national reconciliation (Tunisia);
148.140 Prosecute persons or groups exploiting migrant workers or subjecting
them to forced labour (Rwanda);
148.141 Create independent judicial mechanisms to investigate crimes and
other human rights violations (Senegal);
148.142 Investigate all forced disappearances and charge or release those
arbitrarily or unlawfully detained (United States of America);
148.143 Facilitate access for international non-governmental organizations
and United Nations bodies to mass grave sites and detention centres, protect
detainees from violence, exploitation and abuse by smugglers and hold
accountable those responsible for such acts (United States of America);
148.144 Take steps towards effectively investigating human rights violations
taking place at land and sea borders, as well as in detention, with a view to
bringing alleged perpetrators to justice (Afghanistan);
A/HRC/46/17
18
148.145 Conduct transparent and effective investigations into violations of
international human rights law and international humanitarian law and ensure
that all perpetrators are brought to justice (Belgium);
148.146 Facilitate the impartial and transparent investigation of serious acts of
violence against migrants (Botswana);
148.147 Take urgent and immediate action to ensure, including through full
cooperation with the United Nations, that all parties to the conflict in Libya cease
violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, including attacks
on civilians (Canada);
148.148 Ensure that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law are brought to justice
(Chile);
148.149 Facilitate prompt and transparent investigations into human rights
violations and possible war crimes and hold accountable those behind the attacks
and violations (Costa Rica);
148.150 Pursue efforts to eliminate all root causes of conflict, establish
cooperation between all Libyan parties and the fact-finding mission, provide it
with the necessary facilitation and combat impunity for the perpetrators of
violations of human rights law and international humanitarian law (State of
Palestine);
148.151 Assist investigations into violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, in a non-partisan and transparent manner,
committed by State and non-State actors (Cyprus);
148.152 Ensure that all perpetrators of violations and abuses of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law from all sides of the
conflict are investigated and prosecuted in accordance with international
standards, and cooperate with the International Criminal Court in this regard
(Czechia);
148.153 Hold accountable those responsible for violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law and abuses of human rights, in accordance
with international standards (Estonia);
148.154 End impunity and ensure accountability for all abuses and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law and bring those responsible
for violations to justice (Finland);
148.155 Ensure that all detained persons have access to formal judicial
processes and that the minimum standards for their treatment are respected
(Germany);
148.156 Continue ongoing efforts to investigate, prosecute and punish
perpetrators of war crimes and other human rights violations (Ghana);
148.157 Ensure accountability for all gross violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including summary
executions, enforced disappearances and torture, by any actor, Libyan or
foreign, under the control of either the Government of National Accord or the
Libyan National Army, on any part of the national territory (Greece);
148.158 Investigate all unresolved cases of the killing of journalists and media
workers (Greece);
148.159 Investigate all allegations of excessive use of force, as well as all human
rights violations, including arbitrary arrest and detention, restrictions on
freedom of expression as well as on the right of peaceful assembly and protest in
Libya (Iceland);
148.160 Increase the efforts to investigate all allegations of torture, summary
execution, arbitrary detention and other human rights violations and abuses,
A/HRC/46/17
19
including sexual and gender-based violence, in order to ensure accountability
(Italy);
148.161 Strengthen efforts to bring to book perpetrators of violations of human
rights, in particular those infringing on the right to life (Lesotho);
148.162 Create independent judicial mechanisms to investigate war crimes and
other human rights violations to put an end to impunity (Luxembourg);
148.163 Investigate the unlawful killings of migrants that were documented in
all conflict areas and punish perpetrators with appropriate sanctions
(Montenegro);
148.164 Establish a fully independent judicial mechanism to investigate,
prosecute and punish perpetrators of war crimes and other human rights
violations (Namibia);
148.165 Ensure the unconditional release of people who have been arbitrarily
detained or otherwise unlawfully deprived of their liberty, investigate all
allegations of torture, summary execution, enforced disappearance and other
abuses and hold the perpetrators accountable (Norway);
148.166 Investigate all reports of human rights violations committed against
Libyans, as well as refugees and migrants, including, but not limited to, enforced
disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment, unlawful killing,
forced displacement, attacks against civilians and civilian objects and cases of
sexual violence and abuse against women and girls, and bring the perpetrators
to justice (Poland);
148.167 Step up efforts to ensure the rule of law and transitional justice and
prevent impunity (Qatar);
148.168 Amend Presidential Council Decree No. 28147 of 2019 to respect
freedom of association (United States of America);
148.169 Consider taking advantage of the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity as a means of strengthening the
protection of journalists (Afghanistan);
148.170 Amend articles 37 and 41 of the draft Constitution released in July
2017, to guarantee freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly (Australia);
148.171 Immediately release arbitrarily or unlawfully arrested journalists
(Austria);
148.172 Create a safe, inclusive and enabling environment for all civil society
stakeholders, including women, minorities and vulnerable groups, and ensure
their meaningful participation in all stages of the peacebuilding process
(Czechia);
148.173 Protect journalists and human rights defenders (France);
148.174 Ensure the protection of human rights defenders, journalists and
political activists from arbitrary arrest and enforced disappearance (Germany);
148.175 Protect and promote religious freedom, so that people of all faiths can
freely and openly practise their religion without fear of discrimination and/or
retaliation (Holy See);
148.176 Protect journalists, media workers and human rights defenders from
acts of violence and harassment, investigate attacks against them and hold the
perpetrators accountable (Norway);
148.177 Consider adopting legislation to regulate the work of civil society,
which respects freedom of association and peaceful assembly (Peru);
A/HRC/46/17
20
148.178 Lift all existing restrictions on civil society organizations and their
activities and take measures to protect human rights defenders and media and
legal professionals (Portugal);
148.179 Ensure that journalists and media workers can carry out their work
without fear of reprisal (Republic of Korea);
148.180 Adopt the necessary measures and legislation to combat trafficking in
persons (Saudi Arabia);
148.181 Adopt the necessary measures and legislation to combat the flow of
mercenaries (Saudi Arabia);
148.182 Accelerate measures against smugglers, traffickers and slavers, to end
the sale of humans into slavery and forced labour (South Africa);
148.183 Put in place stronger mechanisms to prevent trafficking in persons and
support the victims of trafficking (Uganda);
148.184 End the exploitation of migrants and refugees in detention centres and
work towards closing and transitioning away from the use of detention centres
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
148.185 Prosecute and punish the perpetrators of crimes of trafficking in
persons, including the sale of persons to subject them to slavery or forced labour
and the trafficking of women and girls for the purpose of sexual exploitation
(Spain);
148.186 Continue efforts to combat trafficking in persons by developing and
implementing a national action plan in this area (Angola);
148.187 Continue to enact laws, legislation and national plans aimed at
eliminating all smuggling networks and protecting migrants from exploitation
(Bahrain);
148.188 Continue to enact laws and legislation aimed at combating trafficking
in persons, especially women and children (Bahrain);
148.189 Strengthen laws and programmes to prevent trafficking in persons (Sri
Lanka);
148.190 Combat trafficking in persons and protect the rights of migrants
(China);
148.191 Accelerate efforts and take appropriate measures to ensure criminal
proceedings against perpetrators of trafficking in persons and provide
appropriate care to victims of trafficking (Djibouti);
148.192 Increase its efforts to end trafficking in persons, arbitrary arrests and
the detention of migrants (Finland);
148.193 Adopt and enact legislation to combat trafficking in persons and put
an effective end to the migration flows from Libyan shores, including by
dismantling facilities and networks run by private or foreign State actors
(Greece);
148.194 Continue its efforts to adopt anti-trafficking measures (India);
148.195 Strengthen measures for combating trafficking in persons, slavery and
other human rights abuses (Indonesia);
148.196 Enhance its work regarding the combating of trafficking in persons, as
well as the sale of persons into modern slavery or forced labour, including the
practices of sexual exploitation and sexual slavery (Liechtenstein);
148.197 Intensify its actions to combat trafficking in persons, in particular of
African migrants (Mali);
A/HRC/46/17
21
148.198 Take effective steps to end the sale of humans into slavery and forced
labour (Timor-Leste);
148.199 Step-up efforts to combat trafficking in persons and increase measures
to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice (Myanmar);
148.200 Continue to take necessary measures to eliminate smuggling and
trafficking networks and protect migrants from exploitation and abuse (Nepal);
148.201 Adopt further measures for combating trafficking in persons and
ensure the protection of the rights of victims of trafficking, as well as the rights
of migrants (Nigeria);
148.202 Take strong action against smugglers, traffickers, slave traders and all
individuals or groups exploiting migrant workers or subjecting them to forced
labour, including prostitution and sexual exploitation (Togo);
148.203 Continue efforts aimed at combating trafficking in persons, guarantee
the rights of victims and provide them with protection and assistance (Qatar);
148.204 Adopt concrete anti-trafficking measures to prevent the sale of
humans into slavery, sexual exploitation and forced labour (Republic of Korea);
148.205 Continue its efforts to promote peace and security in order to facilitate
the enjoyment of human rights by its people (Viet Nam);
148.206 Continue working with the relevant United Nations agencies, including
the World Health Organization, to combat the pandemic, in particular through
greater public awareness efforts (Singapore);
148.207 Continue to improve people’s access to basic health care and education
(Bangladesh);
148.208 Take the necessary steps, including by working with the relevant
United Nations agencies, as appropriate, to mitigate the negative impact on
access to education, in particular for vulnerable groups such as children and
persons with disabilities, considering the COVID-19 pandemic (Singapore);
148.209 Take appropriate measures to ensure that children have access to
education and to protect the educational environments from conflict (Sri Lanka);
148.210 Take all necessary measures to prevent attacks on schools and health-
care facilities (Indonesia);
148.211 Take necessary measures to provide education for all, including the
children of migrant workers (Kenya);
148.212 Take all necessary measures to protect the educational environment,
including by restoring educational institutions that have been destroyed
(Malaysia);
148.213 Continue efforts to provide quality education by collaborating with
relevant stakeholders, including United Nations agencies (Malaysia);
148.214 Pursue efforts for the promotion and protection of the right to
education (Mauritania);
148.215 Take further steps to improve access to education and to health care
for its people (Mauritius);
148.216 Take all necessary measures to protect the educational environment
from conflict and adhere to the UNESCO Safe Schools Declaration (Panama);
148.217 Step up efforts to protect the educational system from violence
resulting from the conflict and ensure that children have access to education
throughout the country (Peru);
A/HRC/46/17
22
148.218 Guarantee greater participation of women and minorities in the
political and economic life in Libya, including by promoting greater
representation in parliament (Sierra Leone);
148.219 Step up efforts to ensure the rights of women (Ukraine);
148.220 Ensure the full, equal and effective participation of women in conflict
resolution and decision-making and tackle sexual and gender-based violence
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
148.221 Ensure the full and effective participation of women in the political
process (Spain);
148.222 Repeal the provisions of the Personal Status Act that are
discriminatory against women regarding marriage, divorce, inheritance and
transmission of nationality (Spain);
148.223 Strengthen efforts to eliminate violence against women by expanding
the ongoing public awareness programmes countrywide (Zimbabwe);
148.224 Streamline empowerment programmes for women in the economic
and political fields (Zimbabwe);
148.225 Take specific measures to increase the active participation of women
in the decision-making process in public life, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) (Angola);
148.226 Amend laws and legislation to ensure that they are not discriminatory
against women, criminalize violence against women and ensure that those who
commit such violence are held to account (Australia);
148.227 Ensure the meaningful participation of women in political and public
life, including in the Libyan Political Dialogue and all meetings and consultation
processes related to peace talks, as well as on the committee for elections
(Austria);
148.228 Redouble efforts to combat all forms of violence against women and
ensure that the perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice (Burkina Faso);
148.229 Pursue a national policy to post the position of women within society
and decision-making positions (State of Palestine);
148.230 Adopt measures to combat violence against women and establish a
complaint mechanism (Cyprus);
148.231 Reaffirm its commitment to ensuring the full and effective
participation of women in the peace process (Denmark);
148.232 Protect and fight against violence and discrimination against women
(France);
148.233 Continue efforts aimed at the empowerment of women across the
country (Georgia);
148.234 Ensure gender equality by protecting and promoting the rights of
women, including by amending domestic law, especially those laws that are
discriminatory against Libyan women married to foreign nationals (Ghana);
148.235 Take all necessary measures to combat violence against women and
girls and domestic violence, both in law and in practice (Latvia);
148.236 Adopt clear and enforceable provisions criminalizing violence against
women, including domestic and sexual violence (Latvia);
148.237 Strengthen efforts to combat all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence, including serious acts of violence committed against migrants, refugees
and members of their families, and bring those accountable to justice
(Liechtenstein);
A/HRC/46/17
23
148.238 Guarantee the active and genuine participation of women at all levels
of peace processes and ensure their political representation through the
establishment of quotas (Luxembourg);
148.239 Impose stricter enforcement measures to curb the sexual abuse and
exploitation of women in detention and migrant women (Malaysia);
148.240 Ensure the full and effective participation of women in the peace
process (Malta);
148.241 Review the Labour Code to remove restrictions on the types of work
that women can perform and eliminate gender stereotypes in legislation, which
lead women to work mainly in fields traditionally associated with their gender
(Mexico);
148.242 Continue to enhance measures to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence (Nepal);
148.243 Ensure access for women to participate in political, constitutional and
transitional justice processes (Norway);
148.244 Enact a comprehensive law to protect, respect and fulfil women’s
rights and combat discrimination (Portugal);
148.245 Establish mechanisms to support and rehabilitate children caught up
in armed conflict (Uganda);
148.246 Guarantee access to birth registration for all children born in the
country (Costa Rica);
148.247 Strengthen efforts to protect children’s right to education from the
ongoing conflict, including by seeking technical assistance from international
partners to rehabilitate schools and classrooms, provide public transportation to
school and provide human rights training to teachers (Fiji);
148.248 Ensure the rights of women and girls, protect them from gender-based
violence and discrimination and amend the legislative framework to promote
gender equality (Finland);
148.249 Strengthen the legal and policy protections that guarantee the rights
of the child (India);
148.250 Take measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of every child,
regardless of their origin or nationality (Portugal);
148.251 Continue efforts to strengthen the rights of persons with disabilities,
including through their rehabilitation and integration and by providing the
necessary medical care to them (Sudan);
148.252 Continue to take efforts for promoting and protecting the rights of
persons with disabilities and in particular pay attention to the specific needs of
women and children with disabilities (India);
148.253 Continue working on the implementation of measures to safeguard the
protection and safety of persons with disabilities in conflict settings, including
national emergency and humanitarian relief measures (Malta);
148.254 Continue efforts to combat illegal immigration (Saudi Arabia);
148.255 Continue to reform Libyan detention facilities to ensure the humane
treatment of all migrants and other detainees (Sierra Leone);
148.256 Develop and adopt national refugee legislation based on its
commitments under the Organization of African Unity Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa (Zambia);
148.257 Adopt all necessary measures to preserve the life and security of
migrants who remain detained in centres, including by preventing access to those
centres by armed or criminal groups (Spain);
A/HRC/46/17
24
148.258 Strengthen the legal protection of migrant victims of human rights
violations (Argentina);
148.259 Ensure a coordinated response to internal displacement and review
national legislation to better align policy and law with international obligations
and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (Austria);
148.260 Enhance efforts to protect migrant workers (Sri Lanka);
148.261 Safeguard the rights of refugees, asylum seekers, migrants and
internally displaced persons by protecting them from unlawful killing, enforced
disappearance, torture and other ill-treatment, rape and other sexual violence,
arbitrary detention and forced labour (Belgium);
148.262 Take urgent and immediate steps to enhance the economic and social
conditions of internally displaced persons in Libya, including through food
security and access to medical care (Canada);
148.263 Take urgent and immediate steps to address the plight of migrants,
asylum seekers, refugees and trafficked persons in Libya, ensuring full respect
for their human rights, including by preventing violence against women
(Canada);
148.264 Develop a national road map to establish a strategy for responding
appropriately and effectively to situations of internal displacement in accordance
with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (Chad);
148.265 End the automatic detention of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees
by amending Law No. 19 and ensuring that conditions of detention are in line
with its obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark);
148.266 Redouble efforts, including through legal reforms, to protect migrants
from all forms of discrimination, racism and xenophobia, as well as from all
forms of physical violence and sexual exploitation (Ecuador);
148.267 Guarantee and reinforce the rights of migrant workers and members
of their families (Egypt);
148.268 Redouble its efforts in the preparation of the national irregular
migration strategy, with a view to improving conditions for migrants (Ethiopia);
148.269 Strengthen efforts to provide appropriate and effective responses to
internal displacement, in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement (Fiji);
148.270 Conclude a memorandum of understanding with UNHCR and repeal
legal restrictions in terms of the nationalities potentially eligible for refugee
status (France);
148.271 Continue efforts to safeguard the rights of migrants and to combat
irregular migration (Georgia);
148.272 Put an end to the arbitrary and widespread detention of migrants and
implement the Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa of the Organization of African Unity and other ratified conventions,
while considering the ratification of the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and the Protocol thereto (Switzerland);
148.273 Enhance its plans to facilitate the return of conflict-driven internally
displaced persons to their homes (Islamic Republic of Iran);
148.274 Continue efforts to allow internally displaced persons to return home
(Iraq);
148.275 Implement robust strategies for internally displaced persons in
accordance with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (Kenya);
A/HRC/46/17
25
148.276 Step up efforts to protect migrants and displaced persons by ensuring
access to health-care services and improving the condition of detention shelters
and continue to work with other stakeholders to support safe, orderly and
regular migration (Thailand);
148.277 Protect migrants and asylum seekers from refoulement (Timor-Leste);
148.278 Decriminalize irregular migration, intensify campaigns to prevent the
trafficking of migrant workers and enact legislation that prohibits trafficking in
persons without criminalizing migrants (Mexico);
148.279 Ensure the protection and enjoyment of human rights by internally
displaced persons, including through their voluntary return to their places of
origin and by establishing consultative and participatory mechanisms to ensure
that they are involved in decision-making (Mexico);
148.280 Strengthen measures to protect migrant women and children of
migrants from sexual violence and exploitation and ensure their access to victim
support services (Myanmar);
148.281 Provide detained migrants with legal aid and interpretation services
and guarantee the right of all to have their situation reviewed, the right to appeal
and the right to reparations or compensation (Niger);
148.282 Adopt measures to prevent and combat violence and discrimination
against migrant workers, especially those from sub-Saharan Africa (Togo);
148.283 Investigate and prosecute all human rights violations suffered by
migrants and asylum seekers, in particular sub-Saharan Africans, including
kidnappings, torture, sexual violence, the sale of people as slaves and arbitrary
detention (Panama);
148.284 Take measures to ensure that migrant workers and their families have
access to justice, regardless of their immigration status (Peru);
148.285 Strengthen further measures to ensure the protection of the human
rights of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers, victims of trafficking and members
of other vulnerable groups in the context of irregular migration, especially
women and children (Philippines).
149. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/46/17
26
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Libya was headed by H.E. Mr. Mohamed A. LAMLOM, Minister
of Justice, and composed of the following members:
• H.E. Muhsen S. ABUSNENA, Undersecretary, Ministry of Social Affairs;
• H.E. Mr. Tamim M. BAIOU, Ambassador, Permanent Representative;
• Mr. Salaheddin M. ABUABOUD, Counsellor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• Dr. Nasser F.O. ALGHEITTA, Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• Dr. Tagrid A. O. SHENEEB, Director of the office of the Social and Mental Health,
Member of the National Committee of Humanitarian Law, Ministry of Health;
• Mrs. Aida A.A.M. BAAYO, Consultant, Ministry of Interior;
• Mr. Luai TURJIMAN, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the State of Libya;
• Dr. Osama OMRAN, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the State of Libya;
• Mr. Abdalla A. M. HAJJAJI, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the State of Libya;
• Mr. Wisam ALMILADI, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the State of Libya;
• Mr. Akram ALSHYBANI, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the State of
Libya;
• Mr. Gamal ABUMARFAG, Attaché, Permanent Mission of the State of Libya.
