GE.26-03256 (E) 270326 300326
Human Rights Council
Sixty-second session
15 June–10 July 2026
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Nauru
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/62/7
General Assembly Distr.: General
30 March 2026
Original: English
A/HRC/62/7
2 GE.26-03256
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its fifty-first session from 19 to 30 January 2026.
The review of Nauru was held at the 4th meeting, on 20 January 2026. The delegation of
Nauru was headed by the Minister for Justice and Border Control, Lionel Rouwen Aingimea.
At its 14th meeting, held on 30 January 2026, the Working Group adopted the report on
Nauru.
2. On 8 January 2026, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Nauru: Colombia, Ethiopia and India.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution
5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Nauru:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Costa Rica, on behalf of the members of
the core group of sponsors of the resolutions on the human right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment (Costa Rica, Maldives and Slovenia), Germany, Liechtenstein,
Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was
transmitted to Nauru through the troika. These questions are available on the website of the
universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Nauru considered the universal periodic review not as a compliance
exercise but as a mechanism for genuine dialogue, one that recognized national realities
while encouraging continuous improvement.
6. The delegation highlighted the legislative reforms undertaken, the institutional
strengthening and the promotion and protection of fundamental rights. It acknowledged the
ongoing challenges faced by Nauru as a small island developing State, particularly those
arising from limited capacity, geographic isolation and vulnerability to climate change. Other
disadvantages included limited human and financial resources, and institutional capacity
stretched across multiple portfolios. A single legislative reform often required the same level
of technical drafting, consultation and implementation as in much larger States, but with a
very small fraction of the personnel and budget.
7. Nauru highlighted some advantages of being a small island developing State, namely
direct decision-making, immediate coordination across government, close-knit communities
and strong social cohesion.
8. Nauru underlined the ongoing ratification and domestication of core treaties. On the
ratification of additional treaties, Nauru had undertaken comprehensive stakeholder
consultations, legal assessments and policy reviews to evaluate the feasibility, legislative
readiness and resource implications. It had submitted its conclusions to the Cabinet. The
Cabinet decisions were pending. In addition, the delegation stressed that many principles
contained in unratified treaties, such as equality before the law, due process,
1 A/HRC/WG.6/51/NRU/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/51/NRU/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/51/NRU/3.
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 3
non-discrimination, labour protections and social rights, were already embedded in the
country’s Constitution, legislation and judicial practice.
9. Nauru highlighted the enactment of a series of laws addressing disability inclusion,
consumer protection, financial integrity, public health, policing, economic resilience, small
business development, language preservation, a national human rights institution and climate
adaptation. These reforms reflected the rights-based approach that sought to translate
international standards into practical national outcomes.
10. Regarding the establishment of a national human rights institution, the delegation
underlined the passing of the Human Rights Commission Act in 2025.
11. The delegation referred to the existing legal frameworks that governed judicial
appointments and the tenure and removal of judges, and stressed the lack of arbitrary
interference with judicial functions. Law enforcement reforms, including updates of
legislation and training for the police, were focused on professionalism, accountability and
respect for human rights.
12. The delegation pointed to the domestication of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which had resulted in
the strengthening of legal protections against discrimination, increased access to services and
enhanced institutional coordination.
13. Nauru indicated that its economy had long been shaped by phosphate mining. It
highlighted the environmental impacts of that activity, which continued to affect land use,
housing, food security and livelihoods. Recognizing this challenge, Nauru had embarked on
the Higher Ground Initiative, which was aimed at protecting lives and homes by relocating
communities to safer areas, while promoting sustainable agriculture and renewable energy.
It had also invested in infrastructure, port development, cold storage facilities and renewable
energy – aimed at ensuring access to food, healthcare and employment and a dignified
standard of living.
14. The delegation stressed that climate change was an existential human rights issue in
Nauru. Sea level rise, coastal erosion, water scarcity and extreme weather events directly
threatened the rights to life, housing, health and self-determination. These initiatives required
sustained international cooperation and solidarity.
15. Regarding migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers, the delegation indicated that Nauru
ensured that its legal framework provided due process, access to services and judicial
oversight. While there were currently no long-term asylum-seeker populations in Nauru, the
system remained in place to uphold international standards where the need arose.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
16. During the interactive dialogue, 60 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
17. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised the development of laws aimed at
protecting persons with disabilities, combating domestic violence, safeguarding the family
and ensuring the protection and well-being of the child, as well as progress made on the
implementation of a social benefits system.
18. Viet Nam commended Nauru for its legislative reforms and institution-building
efforts, in particular the adoption of the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act, the Nauru
Economic and Climate Resilience Act and the Health and Medical Services Act. It also
appreciated the country’s social protection initiatives, supporting persons in vulnerable
situations, as well as allowances for older persons and persons with disabilities.
19. Armenia welcomed progress made in policies supporting vulnerable groups and in
initiatives to enhance the capacity of its institutions, which had contributed positively to the
protection and promotion of human rights.
A/HRC/62/7
4 GE.26-03256
20. Australia welcomed the adoption by Nauru of the Inclusion of Persons with
Disabilities Act and the National Social Protection Strategy to improve health, education and
social welfare. It expressed concerned about the reintroduction of the use of corporal
punishment as a disciplinary measure in schools.
21. The Bahamas commended Nauru for its legislative reform and for strengthening its
legal and policy frameworks for the domestication and implementation of core human rights
instruments. It also commended the efforts made to improve access to safe drinking water,
to combat truancy and to incentivize school attendance. The Bahamas recognized challenges
faced by Nauru, due to limited resources.
22. Bangladesh noted the legislative and policy reforms undertaken in recent years for the
promotion and protection of human rights. It also recognized the unique challenges faced by
Nauru, particularly those related to climate change, environmental degradation and limited
natural resources.
23. Botswana commended Nauru for the reforms to its citizenship laws, including the
Nauru Economic and Climate Resilience Act 2024 and amendments to the Naoero
Citizenship Act. It also recognized the efforts made by Nauru to improve access to healthcare
through the enactment of the Health and Medical Services Act 2025. It noted persisting
challenges, including contamination of fresh water sources, as well as food insecurity and
drought.
24. Brazil welcomed the launching of a specialized training programme aimed at
improving police responses to domestic and gender‑based violence. It also acknowledged
the existential threat that climate change posed to Nauru and encouraged continued efforts
by Nauru to strengthen institutional capacity to build resilience and to guarantee
non‑discriminatory enjoyment of the rights to health, education and development.
25. Bulgaria appreciated significant steps taken by Nauru to strengthen its legislative
framework through the adoption of several legal acts. It commended the implementation of
the Child Protection and Welfare Act 2016, which proclaimed the best interests of the child.
26. Canada acknowledged the steps taken by Nauru to promote and protect human rights
and commended the implementation of the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023.
27. Chile welcomed the establishment of the Department of Women’s Affairs and Social
Development, and the simplification of the procedure for obtaining protection orders in cases
of domestic violence. It also welcomed the adoption of laws and measures for the protection
of women from violence.
28. China noted that, since the last round of the universal periodic review, Nauru had
advanced legislative reforms, strengthened the protection of the rights of specific groups
such as women, children and persons with disabilities, improved the healthcare services and
optimized the business environment.
29. Colombia praised the incorporation of the international human rights treaties to which
Nauru was a Party into domestic law.
30. Cuba recognized the commitment of Nauru to the universal periodic review and the
progress achieved since the last review.
31. Cyprus praised progress made in promoting gender equality and protecting the rights
of women and girls, especially from violence.
32. Dominica welcomed the legislative reforms to domesticate the international human
rights obligations of Nauru, including the adoption of legislation on the inclusion of persons
with disabilities, access to health and medical services, policing, and consumer protection.
33. The Dominican Republic acknowledged the approval of the Inclusion of Persons with
Disabilities Act 2023, the creation of the Department of Women’s Affairs and Social
Development, the adoption of the Gender Equality Action Plan 2025–2030, the
establishment of compulsory education up to the age of 18, and the implementation of the
National Sustainable Development Strategy.
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 5
34. Estonia commended Nauru for amending the Citizenship Act to prevent
discrimination and ensure that naturalized citizens could remain united with their children.
35. Ethiopia welcomed the strengthening of child protection, family welfare, disability
inclusion, and access to health and education. It praised the commitment of Nauru to address
the connections between climate change, sustainable development and human rights.
36. Fiji commended the ongoing efforts made by Nauru to domesticate the ratified
international human rights treaties, as well as the implementation of recommendations from
previous cycles.
37. France made recommendations.
38. The Gambia welcomed the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023, the
Human Rights Commission Bill, of 2025, as well as investments in education, health and
climate resilience. It also welcomed improvements in girls’ access to education and women’s
participation in public services, as well as measures to strengthen protections against
domestic violence and workplace harassment.
39. Georgia remained concerned because a substantial number of critical issues remained
unattended to by Nauru despite its commitments to fulfil the recommendations accepted
during the previous cycle.
40. Germany welcomed the commitment by Nauru to combating corruption and the
National Anti-Corruption Strategy Working Group Committee. It remained concerned about
the lack of independence of the media, access to clean and safe drinking water, domestic
violence and gender-based violence against women and girls, and about the low school
attendance figures.
41. Guyana commended progress made on legal reforms, such as the adoption of the
Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023, the Nauru Economic and Climate Resilience
Act 2024 and the Health and Medical Services Act 2025.
42. The Holy See made recommendations.
43. Iceland made recommendations.
44. India appreciated the adoption of the National Gender Equality Policy and Action Plan
2025–2030 and the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023. It also welcomed the
enactment of the Health and Medical Services Act 2025 and the Pharmacy Act 2025,
strengthening health services and public service delivery capacity.
45. Indonesia welcomed the commitment made by Nauru to human capital development,
through initiatives in education, health and economic resilience. Indonesia also commended
the enactment of key legislation, such as the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023
and the Nauru Police Force Act.
46. The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomed legal reforms undertaken by Nauru since
2020, particularly on the domestication of the international human rights treaties to which
Nauru was a State Party. It encouraged Nauru to continue its forward-looking approaches in
the field of human rights.
47. Nauru stressed that it had integrated environmental protection and human well-being
in its national sustainable development strategy 2019–2030, which placed environmental
sustainability, climate resilience, public health and food security at the centre of development
planning. In addition, access to safe water and sanitation had been strengthened through
sustained investment in desalination, rainwater harvesting and a reliable water supply for
households, schools and health facilities.
48. The delegation referred to a renewable energy project that, once operational, was
expected to increase renewable energy from around 3% to approximately 47% or 48% of
electricity generation, thereby reducing emissions, stabilizing the electricity supply,
strengthening energy security and moderating costs for households and businesses, while
aligning energy policy with climate and development priorities.
A/HRC/62/7
6 GE.26-03256
49. Nauru also referred to progress made in sustainable fisheries management and marine
conservation to promote sustainable local food production and improve nutrition. It referred
to measures to ensure that non-toxic environments included improved waste management,
pollution control and public awareness activities.
50. On the protection of women and girls, the delegation highlighted the strengthening of
inter-agency coordination between the police and health and social services. It also
highlighted the strengthening of the judiciary, supported by a clear referral pathway and
trauma-informed victim-centred training for frontline responders in the short term. In the
medium term, community engagement prevention and awareness initiatives grounded in
cultural and faith-based leadership were being advanced, alongside strengthened access to
counselling, safe accommodation and health services. In the long term, Nauru was focused
on sustainable institutions, improved data collection, and embedding family protection
priorities within its national development planning.
51. Nauru highlighted the National Anti-Corruption Strategy, and its Working Group
Committee, to improve institutional coordination, public awareness and capacity-building in
the short term, while medium-term action was focused on risk assessment, data management,
and stronger integrity systems supported by regional and international cooperation.
52. On media freedom, the delegation highlighted the legislative and administrative
reviews aimed at ensuring proportional and clear regulations. It also indicated that
government-owned media ensured a coherent, accurate and timely dissemination of
information without restricting access to external or international media sources. In addition,
Nauru was actively advancing the Access to Information Bill. The delegation referred to the
East Micronesia cable system, which had significantly improved bandwidth, stability and
service quality, enabling digital government services, online education, health access, private
sector activity and greater resilience against isolation.
53. Nauru reported that it had initiated a review of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and its Optional Protocols, as well as the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, to assess their compatibility with the Constitution,
the implementation requirements and reporting capacity.
54. Nauru highlighted progress on gender-sensitive legislation, while taking into
consideration its constitutional framework and a national understanding of genders, with a
focus on strengthening protections against discrimination, harassment and gender-based
violence through consultative legal reforms, capacity-building and public awareness.
55. To address teenage pregnancy, Nauru reported the establishment of targeted school
and community-based programmes providing age-appropriate sexual and reproductive
health education, alongside telehealth, counselling, education and social support for pregnant
teenagers.
56. The delegation reported on the recent enactment of the Human Rights Commission
Act 2025. It indicated that technical guidance, training and capacity-building would be
critical for ensuring that the Commission operated independently, credibly and in line with
the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights (the Paris Principles).
57. Iraq took note of the endeavours by Nauru to harmonize its national legislation with
its international obligations.
58. Ireland commended progress made in promoting gender equality and protecting
women from violence, including intimate partner violence and marital rape. It recognized
the adoption of the Action Plan for National Gender Equality Policies 2025–2030. Ireland
was concerned, however, about limited access to sexual and reproductive health information
and services for women and girls.
59. Italy welcomed the commitment of Nauru to protecting fundamental rights, including
efforts to prevent modern slavery and human trafficking, and praised the drafting of the
National Security Strategy in line with international standards.
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 7
60. Kiribati commended the adoption of the Nauru Declaration on Judicial Well-being,
setting out seven core principles for healthier, resilient and ethical judiciaries to ensure the
protection of human rights.
61. Malawi highlighted progress made through legal reforms, particularly the
domestication of international human rights treaties to which Nauru was a Party, including
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.
62. Malaysia commended Nauru for the considerable progress made in promoting,
protecting and fulfilling the human rights of all persons in the country.
63. Maldives praised the establishment of the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities
Council, and the continued implementation of child protection and domestic violence
legislation. It also welcomed the significant reforms, including the adoption of the Inclusion
of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023 and the Nauru Economic and Climate Resilience Act
2024.
64. The Marshall Islands commended the efforts of Nauru to address climate change,
including the submission of its third nationally determined contribution in 2025 and the
endorsement of a gender-responsive climate change policy. It also welcomed the adoption
of the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023, reflecting inclusive and human rights-
based policymaking.
65. Mauritius congratulated Nauru on its climate action policies, which had a strong
human rights-based focus.
66. Mexico recognized the strengthening of the country’s institutional and regulatory
framework for gender equality.
67. Montenegro welcomed progress in gender equality and in the protection of women
and girls. It highlighted the establishment of the Department of Women and Social
Development Affairs. Montenegro commended the adoption of the Inclusion of Persons with
Disabilities Act 2023 and coordination mechanisms. Montenegro encouraged its effective
implementation, with attention paid to women, children and older persons with disabilities.
However, Montenegro expressed concern about the climate vulnerability of Nauru affecting
the rights to health, education and development.
68. Morocco appreciated the legal reforms undertaken by Nauru to strengthen policies,
legislation and institutional frameworks to promote and protect human rights. It commended
advances made to enhance the well-being of women in line with the commitments made
under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
69. Nepal noted the efforts by Nauru to implement recommendations from previous
review cycles. It noted positively the progress made in enhancing access to quality healthcare
services.
70. The Kingdom of the Netherlands commended the adoption of the Action Plan for
National Gender Equality Policies and encouraged further measures to strengthen the rights
of women and girls, particularly to improve their economic, social and political participation.
71. The Federated States of Micronesia applauded the strengthened engagement of Nauru
with international human rights mechanisms, and advances made in legal and institutional
frameworks to protect vulnerable groups, including women, children, older persons and
persons with disabilities. It encouraged continued efforts to improve livelihoods, to ensure
quality education and access to it for all children, and to reduce educational barriers affecting
girls.
72. New Zealand welcomed the focus of Nauru on strengthening its social protection
systems, including through the National Social Protection Strategy and the enhanced social
welfare payments and programmes. It also welcomed the passage of the Human Rights
Commission Bill 2025.
A/HRC/62/7
8 GE.26-03256
73. The Philippines acknowledged the upholding by Nauru of the right to health, which
included improved hospital infrastructure, increased practitioner numbers and specialist care,
and legal reforms such as the Health and Medical Services Act and the Pharmacy Act.
74. Portugal noted with appreciation the Clinical Practice Guidelines for Survivors of
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence 2024, as well as training for the health workforce that
had strengthened the survivor-centred response.
75. The Russian Federation noted the efforts by Nauru to address pressing human rights
challenges, including food security amid reliance on imports, and adaptation to climate
change. It commended the financial assistance provided by Nauru to families to support the
right to education and noted the availability of scholarships for eligible students pursuing
secondary and higher education abroad.
76. Samoa commended continued advancements on human rights through significant
legislative reforms, in particular the Nauru Economic and Climate Resilience Act 2024 and
the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities Act 2023.
77. Sierra Leone commended Nauru for the adoption of domestic legislation to implement
its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It acknowledged the introduction of robust social safety
nets, including free comprehensive healthcare and targeted cash benefits.
78. Singapore welcomed the Clinical Practice Guidelines for Survivors of Sexual and
Gender-Based Violence 2024 and the support services introduced for survivors, which
included free legal advice, and assistance in obtaining protection orders and access to
accommodation and safe spaces for women and their children at risk. It noted positively the
efforts made to strengthen the right to health through the Health and Medical Services Act
2025.
79. Slovenia commended the steps taken by Nauru to strengthen its legislation and
institutions. It expressed concern about gaps in the protection of the rights of the child,
including the need for stronger safeguards to ensure children’s safety, well-being and access
to inclusive, quality education and psychological support. It welcomed the National Gender
Equality Action Plan 2025–2030, yet expressed concern about the persistence of violence
against women and girls.
80. Spain praised Nauru for the progress made towards the abolition of the death penalty,
on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex rights and on the inclusion of persons
with disabilities.
81. Switzerland made recommendations.
82. Togo noted the progress made by Nauru regarding human rights, particularly the
reforms to the citizenship law, as well as the measures taken to promote the rights to
education and health.
83. Ukraine appreciated the continued engagement of Nauru with the universal periodic
review process and commended the concrete reforms undertaken to strengthen the human
rights obligations of Nauru, particularly its efforts to advance gender equality and to promote
judicial independence and resilience.
84. The United Kingdom highlighted the efforts made by Nauru to enact legal and policy
reforms to protect the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities. It also
welcomed the commitment of Nauru to protections against gender-based violence, and to
improve its food security. It urged Nauru to continue to seek support from international
partners to address the financial, logistical and climate-related challenges that Nauru faced.
85. Uruguay made recommendations.
86. Vanuatu highlighted the challenges faced by Nauru as a small island developing State,
and particularly on climate change. Vanuatu welcomed the establishment of frameworks to
build strong and resilient communities to ensure that all Nauruans continued to enjoy basic
human rights and freedoms, even in the face of climate change and natural disasters. Vanuatu
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 9
also commended the Sustainable and Resilient Urban Development Project to significantly
enhance access to safe drinking water and sanitation services.
87. While the delegation acknowledged that it had not yet ratified the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and its Optional Protocol, it underlined
that Nauru was actively reviewing that instrument to ensure that it was aligned with national
capacities, the legal system and the sociocultural context. Nauru was also considering
accession to other core human rights instruments, balancing international commitments with
national priorities.
88. The delegation acknowledged the recommendations calling for the ratification of
additional international human rights instruments. It stressed that that non-ratification should
not be understood as non-commitment or inaction. The country’s approach to treaty
engagement was deliberate, constitutionally grounded and implementation-driven. It
prioritized practical alignment, legislative coherence and institutional readiness over
symbolic ascension.
89. Although Nauru was not Party to the conventions on statelessness, it had enacted
domestic measures to prevent statelessness. Nauru stressed that it did not have a domestic
mechanism to identify and protect stateless individuals. It relied on the national citizenship
laws, particularly the Nauru Citizenship Act 2017, which provided for executive discretion
for preventing statelessness, especially for children born in Nauru. Nauru was considering
acceding to the statelessness conventions.
90. The delegation referred to the limited human and technical resources of a microstate
such as Nauru in explaining the delays in meeting its reporting obligations. The delegation
pointed to the concrete steps taken to strengthen interministerial coordination on human
rights by enhancing the work of the national mechanism for implementation, reporting and
follow-up.
91. The delegation reiterated that, based on the Human Rights Commission Act, Nauru
was developing the infrastructure, policy measures and plans for it to establish a human
rights commissioner’s office, as well as the legal mechanisms to support oversight of the
implementation of that Act.
92. Nauru indicated that it was reviewing the essential medicines list, improving maternal
and child health services, including mental health services, and enhancing family planning
and youth-friendly reproductive health services. It also reported that the country was focused
on improving nutrition, combating child violence, preventing early marriage and addressing
adolescent fertility.
93. The delegation stressed that education was free and compulsory from the ages of 4 to
18, under the Education Act 2011 as amended. While the Constitution of Nauru did not
explicitly guarantee the right to education, the existing policies promoted inclusive education
and addressed barriers for all children and persons with disabilities.
94. Regarding corporal punishment, the delegation indicated that Nauru sought to balance
cultural sensitivity with the need to protect children. It highlighted the ongoing consultations,
the lack of an active policy to reintroduce corporal punishment, and the positive parenting
programmes and community engagement to prevent violent discipline.
95. Nauru noted that it had abolished the death penalty through the Crimes Act, in 2016,
and had consistently voted in favour of the General Assembly resolution on this issue.
96. Nauru acknowledged its responsibility regarding asylum-seekers and indicated that it
was acting in full compliance with the domestic legal framework and international
obligations. It was providing human treatment, access to healthcare and emergency services,
and essential support. In addition, Nauru was working with international partners to pursue
durable solutions, such as voluntary resettlement, family reunification and access to
education and social services for asylum-seekers.
97. Regarding women in politics, the delegation indicated that, rather than adopting
external imposed quotas or temporary special measures, the Government prioritized
strengthening women’s participation organically and in ways that were culturally grounded.
In addition, Nauru was investing in education, mentoring and capacity-building. The
A/HRC/62/7
10 GE.26-03256
delegation highlighted the Nauru National Women’s Summit and the Leadership
Programme, facilitated by the Women’s Empowerment Association of Nauru, the
establishment of the Department of Women and Social Development Affairs, the adoption
of the action plan for the national gender equality policy for 2025–2030, the Domestic
Violence and Family Protection Act 2017 and the relevant provisions of the Crimes Act
2016. Nauru also highlighted its gender-responsive approach to climate change adaptation,
disaster risk management and infrastructure planning.
98. Nauru reported on the measures taken to ensure sustainable access to safe drinking
water, and to strengthen water security and resilience, including improvements to rainwater
harvesting, water storage and climate-resilient water management systems. The delegation
indicated that climate and environmental risks were increasingly incorporated into the
national health planning.
99. Nauru acknowledged the need to improve the health of children and remained
committed to reducing under-5 mortality rates by addressing malnutrition and closing
immunization gaps. It had adopted an integrated approach to child health by linking health
services with water, sanitation and hygiene initiatives, early childhood development
programmes and community education.
100. As a Christian nation, Nauru reported that it did not support the recommendations on
sexual orientation or LGBTQ+ persons, yet it reaffirmed its upholding of the principle of
equality before the law.
101. The delegation acknowledged the absence of legislation regulating access to public
information. However, the Government continued to explore measures to enhance
transparency and accountability, including the adoption of legislation on freedom of
information through a digital-first approach that would improve public access to government
information. Nauru added that its media model reflected the country’s small geographic size
and population rather than an intention to limit freedom of expression. According to the
delegation, consolidating media under government ownership allowed for efficient
communication, centralized reporting of public information and practical management of
resources while avoiding duplication in a limited media market. Citizens and residents were
free to obtain information from regional and global media platforms, including digital and
online sources.
102. As a very small and close-knit society, Nauru indicated that defamation laws had been
introduced to maintain social cohesion and protect reputations while ensuring responsible
public discourse. The criminal provisions against defamation were aimed at preventing harm
and safeguarding the rule of law rather than at suppressing free speech.
103. Nauru recognized that strengthening the institutional capacity of the Department of
Climate Change and National Resilience was critical to effectively address the increasing
impact of climate change. To this end, the Government was prioritizing the enhancement of
technical expertise coordination and resource mobilization.
104. The delegation acknowledged that abortion was criminalized in Nauru because the
country operated within a pro-life legal and cultural framework that valued the protection of
human life including unborn life. It referred to the constitutional values, Christian heritage
and deeply held societal norms which emphasized the sanctity of life. The law permitted
abortion only when it was necessary to save the life of the mother. At present, Nauru was
not committed to decriminalizing abortion. Any consideration of a legal reform on this
subject would require a broad national dialogue. Nauru prioritized preventive approaches,
including access to quality maternal healthcare and family planning services over abortion.
The Government had invested in free universal healthcare, improved antenatal and postnatal
services, skilled birth attendants, and expanding family planning and reproductive health
education, including youth-friendly services.
105. In closing, the delegation welcomed the observations made by Member States to
Nauru and reiterated that these would be addressed with seriousness, transparency and long-
term commitment to sustainable progress. It highlighted the strong interest expressed in the
response by Nauru to climate change and environmental vulnerability. Nauru remained
committed to addressing those challenges through practical national measures. Nauru
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 11
indicated that the Government would undertake internal consultations and assessments to
determine which recommendations from this review could be accepted and implemented in
a manner that was effective, realistic and sustainable. Furthermore, the accepted
recommendations would inform the ongoing national planning and implementation efforts.
106. Nauru indicated that it valued the universal periodic review as a meaningful platform
for dialogue, reflection and partnership and that the country remained committed to
advancing the dignity and rights of all its people.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
107. The following recommendations will be examined by Nauru, which will provide
responses in due time, but no later than the sixty-second session of the Human Rights
Council:
107.1 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Colombia)
(France);
107.2 Ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (New Zealand);
107.3 Ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, including its Optional Protocol (Ukraine);
107.4 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(New Zealand);
107.5 Become a Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(Australia);
107.6 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, signed
in 2001, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
and International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, signed in 2001 (Sierra Leone);
107.7 Ratify core human rights treaties, including the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Fiji);
107.8 Consider acceding to the core international human rights treaties
(India);
107.9 Consider ratifying core human rights instruments, including the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Marshall Islands);
107.10 Accelerate the ratification of outstanding core international human
rights treaties and optional protocols and strengthen national capacity for their
effective implementation and reporting (Gambia);
107.11 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its
optional protocols, and make the necessary modifications to the domestic legal
framework for their effective implementation (Chile);
107.12 Adopt cabinet resolutions and develop implementation plans for the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination by 2028
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
A/HRC/62/7
12 GE.26-03256
107.13 Consider ratifying the already signed international treaties like the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
acceding to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(Islamic Republic of Iran);
107.14 Continue consideration of the ratification of outstanding core
international human rights treaties, including the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Indonesia);
107.15 Explore additional measures to expedite the consideration of proposals
to accede to other core international human rights treaties, particularly the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families (Philippines);
107.16 Ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (Georgia);
107.17 Make progress in the ratification of the main international instruments
to which the country is not a Party, as previously recommended (Uruguay);
107.18 Ratify key international human rights treaties to which Nauru is not
Party yet (Morocco);
107.19 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Mexico);
107.20 Consider acceding to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of
Stateless Persons (Malawi);
107.21 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its
optional protocols, in particular its Second Optional Protocol, aiming at the
abolition of the death penalty (Togo);
107.22 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Georgia)
(Iceland);
107.23 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and step
up the constitutional referendum process, including an awareness-raising
campaign about the importance of removing the death penalty from the
Constitution of Nauru (Estonia);
107.24 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and its
Second Optional Protocol, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Spain);
107.25 Ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination (Georgia);
107.26 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance (Togo);
107.27 Maintain cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms
of universal, non-selective and non-discriminatory implementation (Cuba);
107.28 Start receiving special procedure mandate holders in accordance with
a standing invitation which was issued back in 2011 (Georgia);
107.29 Repeal from the Constitution all provisions that permit the application
of the death penalty (Dominican Republic);
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 13
107.30 Continue taking targeted measures to improve legislation in the area
of the promotion and protection of human rights (Russian Federation);
107.31 Revise the Constitution so it will include all economic, social and
cultural rights which are contemplated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(Georgia);
107.32 Establish a national human rights institution, in accordance with the
Paris Principles (Australia) (Vanuatu);
107.33 Establish a national human rights institution in full compliance with
the Paris Principles, with adequate financial and administrative resources
(Montenegro);
107.34 Create an independent national institution for the protection of human
rights in accordance with the Paris Principles (France);
107.35 Establish a fully independent and adequately resourced national
human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Gambia);
107.36 Establish an independent and effective national human rights
institution in line with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone);
107.37 Complete the establishment of the independent national human rights
institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles with the enactment of the
Human Rights Commission Bill as institutionally distinct from the existing
national mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up (Fiji);
107.38 Establish an independent, fully operational national human rights
institution in compliance with the Paris Principles, to contribute to the effective
promotion, protection and monitoring of human rights at the national level
(Chile);
107.39 Complete the process of creating a national human rights institution
in accordance with the Paris Principles (Togo);
107.40 Consider establishing a sustainable national human rights institution
in accordance with the Paris Principles (India);
107.41 Consider establishing an independent national human rights
institution in line with the Paris Principles (Nepal);
107.42 Consider establishing a national human rights institution, taking into
account the recommendations made in the preliminary study conducted in 2017
(Colombia);
107.43 Establish an independent Ombudsman’s Office or another national
human rights institution (Dominican Republic);
107.44 Establish an independent Ombudsman’s Office in accordance with
international standards (Ukraine);
107.45 Establish an Ombudsman’s Office (Georgia);
107.46 Establish an Ombudsman’s Office to align laws with international
human rights law (Morocco);
107.47 Accelerate efforts to strengthen the national mechanism for
implementation, reporting and follow-up and consider taking into account the
guidance available through the OHCHR Knowledge Hub and the Marrakech
Guidance Framework on national mechanisms for implementation, reporting
and follow-up (The Bahamas);
A/HRC/62/7
14 GE.26-03256
107.48 Continue to strengthen the Working Group on Treaties as its national
mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up, including through
cooperation with regional and international partners, in order to enhance
coordination, capacity, and the effective implementation of human rights
obligations (Dominica);
107.49 Review its legal framework to ensure the elimination of discriminatory
policies (Cyprus);
107.50 Continue efforts to promote equality between women and men and to
protect the rights of women and girls (Bulgaria);
107.51 Enhance efforts aimed at protecting the rights of vulnerable groups,
including women, children and persons with disabilities, through targeted
policies and programmes (Armenia);
107.52 Ensure the prohibition of capital punishment under all circumstances
(Holy See);
107.53 Ensure the next election is called with sufficient notice for non-
incumbent candidates to contest vacancies, present their platforms, and for
voters to make informed decisions, in line with international standards
(Canada);
107.54 Consider taking steps to establish a right to information framework,
in the context of the centrality of good governance (India);
107.55 Pursue the fight against corruption with resolution and further
develop and implement the national strategy to fight corruption without delay
(Germany);
107.56 Implement measures to broaden the participation and representation
of disadvantaged groups in politics, particularly youth and women (Brazil);
107.57 Take concrete measures to guarantee the rights to freedom of opinion
and expression, particularly by adopting legislation ensuring freedom and access
to information as well as decriminalizing defamation (Brazil);
107.58 Ensure that digital inclusion and development initiatives incorporate
safeguards, particularly for women, youth and persons with disabilities, to
guarantee their safety from technology-facilitated violence (Uruguay);
107.59 Take measures to protect freedom of expression, including in the
digital sphere, and to promote press freedom, including facilitating the entry of
foreign journalists (Spain);
107.60 Eliminate visa fees for journalists and end censorship of the media,
including on social media platforms, to further protect and uphold the right to
freedom of opinion and expression (Canada);
107.61 Protect and uphold media freedom in Nauru, including by reviewing
prohibitively high foreign journalist visa fees to enable foreign journalists to visit
the country (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
107.62 Take the necessary measures to allow access into the country to foreign
journalists, human rights defenders and non-governmental organizations
(Switzerland);
107.63 Review the high visa fees for foreign media to support media access
and freedoms (New Zealand);
107.64 Promote freedom of expression by allowing the emergence of private
media and by reducing the cost of visas for journalists (France);
107.65 Abolish existing social media restrictions, including bans and
censorship, in order to protect and uphold freedom of media and provide an
environment for civic discourse to unfold (Germany);
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 15
107.66 Protect and uphold the right to free and independent media through
the establishment of an independent broadcasting regulator to monitor and
guarantee the transparency and independence of media outlets (Italy);
107.67 Raise the minimum age for admission to employment to at least 15
years, in accordance with international standards (Dominican Republic);
107.68 Adopt policies and review legislation to raise the minimum age of
employment, in accordance with international law, to prevent the employment
of school-age children, including outside school hours (Kiribati);
107.69 Reduce women’s unpaid care burden and enable their participation in
paid work through job opportunities and targeted measures to advance women
into leadership roles in both the public and the private sectors (Cyprus);
107.70 Prohibit discrimination in employment, including discrimination
based on gender, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity (Canada);
107.71 Continue its efforts to strengthen social protection systems by
enhancing data collection and monitoring mechanisms to ensure women, persons
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups are reached (New Zealand);
107.72 Continue enhancing access to basic services and social protection,
particularly for vulnerable groups and remote communities (Ethiopia);
107.73 Improve access to nutritious and balanced meals for all children,
including by integrating nutrition standards and locally sourced foods in the
School Feeding Programme (Indonesia);
107.74 Promote comprehensive nutrition measures focused on promoting
breastfeeding, improve complementary feeding practices, and establish school
nutrition programmes (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
107.75 Collaborate with the Food and Agriculture Organization and other
relevant bodies to institute policies aimed at improving and ensuring food and
nutrition security (Guyana);
107.76 Promote sustainable food security by supporting local food production
initiatives (Botswana);
107.77 Strengthen food security and the realization of the right to adequate
food, including by promoting sustainable production of healthy food (Ukraine);
107.78 Continue adopting measures to strengthen food security and improve
the accessibility and sustainability of food resources for the population (Cuba);
107.79 Strengthen access to safe drinking water and sanitation services for all
households, especially in high-density urban areas (Viet Nam);
107.80 Continue its efforts to ensure safe, reliable and sustainable access to
drinking water and sanitation for the entire population (Marshall Islands);
107.81 Increase its efforts to improve access to clean water and sanitation for
children and families, thus upholding human dignity (Mauritius);
107.82 Take effective measures to improve local access to safe drinking water
for the population and sanitation infrastructure (Spain);
107.83 Prioritize improving women’s access to safe water in the Nauru
Sustainable and Resilient Urban Development Project by 2027 (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
107.84 Continue to improve people’s livelihoods and meet their needs in areas
such as health, medical care and education (China);
107.85 Step up efforts to reduce poverty and ensure further development of
the social and economic spheres (Russian Federation);
A/HRC/62/7
16 GE.26-03256
107.86 Continue to improve measures to protect the rights of specific groups
such as women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, and to increase
support and investment in vulnerable groups (China);
107.87 Strengthen climate-resilient water and sanitation infrastructure to
address saltwater intrusion and ensure sustainable access to safe water and
sanitation services for all children and families (Maldives);
107.88 Strengthen climate-resilient water and sanitation infrastructure to
address saltwater intrusion and ensure sustainable access to safe water and
sanitation services (Cyprus);
107.89 Take further steps to strengthen access to education and health
services (Armenia);
107.90 Continue to strengthen access to quality, inclusive and sustainable
healthcare services for all, particularly persons with disabilities, including by
promoting healthier lifestyles (Malaysia);
107.91 Continue improving access to essential services, including healthcare,
education, safe drinking water and sanitation, with attention to non-
communicable diseases, food security and the special needs of children, persons
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups (Bangladesh);
107.92 Take further measures to increase the availability of health
professionals and improve health management, clinical procedures and hospital
infrastructure in order to enhance access to health services for all citizens
(Bulgaria);
107.93 Work to enhance its health security, improve international health
regulations and the functional performance of national coordination bodies, and
establish strong coordination mechanisms (Iraq);
107.94 Strengthen its multisectoral emergency response mechanisms to
enable effective management of health emergencies (Botswana);
107.95 Collaborate with the World Health Organization and other relevant
bodies to institute policies aimed at improving and ensuring improved access to
healthcare, especially related to NCDs (Guyana);
107.96 Strengthen primary healthcare and implement non-communicable
disease prevention programmes, with attention to maternal nutrition and
antenatal screening (The Bahamas);
107.97 Strengthen the healthcare infrastructure and workforce needed to
treat obstetric emergencies and to address the impacts of non-communicable
diseases on maternal and child health (Fiji);
107.98 Continue efforts to develop public policies on health, access and
socioeconomic well-being to address obesity and diabetes, especially on mothers
and children (Mexico);
107.99 Continue to strengthen its policies to provide access to healthcare for
its people (Singapore);
107.100 Enhance comprehensive health services for all, including maternal,
adolescent and mental health, with particular attention to persons in vulnerable
situations (Viet Nam);
107.101 Continue efforts to strengthen the country’s comprehensive health
system, including family planning services and access to information on sexual
and reproductive health (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
107.102 Strengthen the protection of sexual and reproductive health and rights
and access to healthcare for refugees (France);
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 17
107.103 Ensure access to sexual and reproductive health services and
information for adolescents, including through comprehensive sexuality
education, to reduce teenage pregnancies (Portugal);
107.104 Review and amend its legislation to guarantee safe, legal and effective
access to abortion and expand access to information and services for sexual and
reproductive health (Ireland);
107.105 Ensure access to comprehensive sexuality education in and out of
school settings (Iceland);
107.106 Review and amend laws to decriminalize abortion and enhance access
to sexual and reproductive health services and information for women and youth
(Estonia);
107.107 Decriminalize and legalize abortion (Iceland);
107.108 Maintain existing legislative protection for the unborn and ensure that
current restrictions on the termination of pregnancy remain in force (Holy See);
107.109 Further strengthen the right to education by enshrining it in the
Constitution and national legislation, including a principle of non-
discrimination, and continue to enhance inclusive education policies aimed at
improving access, retention and completion at the secondary level (Portugal);
107.110 Consider guaranteeing the right to education in its Constitution and
legislation, legally proscribe all discrimination in education, and enhance
inclusive education (Kiribati);
107.111 Consider approving legal provisions to enshrine the right to education
and establish at least 11 years of free primary and secondary education and at
least 1 year of free and compulsory preschool education (Colombia);
107.112 Consider enshrining the right to education in domestic law (Malawi);
107.113 Implement educational plans at all levels that not only reduce school
dropout rates but also foster an inclusive and equitable learning environment
(Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
107.114 Step up measures aimed at improving secondary education completion
(Morocco);
107.115 Improve access to and the quality of education, particularly at the
secondary level, aimed at reducing dropout rates and improving learning
outcomes (Samoa);
107.116 Continue its efforts to address the barriers to secondary education for
both girls and boys by enhancing digital learning, thereby reducing absenteeism
and dropout levels (Mauritius);
107.117 Continue improving educational access and quality, particularly at the
secondary level, through targeted interventions to reduce dropout rates and
improve learning outcomes (Kiribati);
107.118 Scale up its efforts to ensure universal access to quality education,
particularly for women and girls (Nepal);
107.119 Consider implementing human rights education for law enforcement
and the judiciary, especially on women’s and children’s rights and gender
equality (Philippines);
107.120 Take active measures to further ensure the right to education, notably
inclusive education for girls and persons with disabilities (Maldives);
107.121 Ensure further measures are taken to protect inclusive education,
notably for girls and persons with disabilities (Cyprus);
107.122 Ensure equal access and opportunities in education for all children,
including those with disabilities (Malaysia);
A/HRC/62/7
18 GE.26-03256
107.123 Integrate human rights considerations into environmental and climate
policies, including by strengthening the preservation of biodiversity and
ecosystems (Armenia);
107.124 Continue integrating human rights into all climate and environmental
policies (Vanuatu);
107.125 Continue to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Climate
Change and National Resilience to effectively address the impacts of climate
change and to support advocacy for climate change mitigation policies (Samoa);
107.126 Include development-based climate policies in national human rights
plan of actions and programmes (Islamic Republic of Iran);
107.127 Strengthen measures for climate change mitigation and adaptation,
and protect vulnerable communities (Nepal);
107.128 Strengthen efforts to enhance climate resilience and protect coastal
and vulnerable communities from climate-related risks (Gambia);
107.129 Develop a climate change and health policy in order to strengthen
health resilience against climate impacts (Marshall Islands);
107.130 Strengthen climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction and
environmental protection efforts, with a focus on community resilience and
sustainable livelihoods (Bangladesh);
107.131 Build upon and expand climate-smart and agroecological agriculture
initiatives to strengthen local food production, resilience to climate impacts and
sustainable livelihoods (Dominica);
107.132 Collaborate with the requisite international organizations to build and
improve national capacity in addressing environmental concerns (Guyana);
107.133 Ensure the participation of women, girls and persons with disabilities
in designing and implementing programmes on climate change adaptation and
mitigation, and ensure that such measures address their rights (Ireland);
107.134 Strengthen community-based resilience and livelihood diversification
programmes that empower women and girls, reduce climate-related
vulnerabilities, and promote the rights of women and persons with disabilities
(Samoa);
107.135 Continue strengthening climate change adaptation and disaster risk
reduction measures, with enhanced international technical assistance and
capacity-building (Ethiopia);
107.136 Strengthen gender-responsive disaster risk reduction and
preparedness, ensuring that national planning and early warning systems
address the specific needs and vulnerabilities of women and girls, the elderly and
persons with disabilities (Philippines);
107.137 Intensify efforts to promote sustainable economic development
through diversification, support from small and medium-sized enterprises and
strengthened public-private partnerships (Malaysia);
107.138 Work in partnership with development partners and with Pacific small
island developing States to strengthen human rights mechanisms across the
Pacific region (Fiji);
107.139 Continue advancing the rights and empowerment of women, including
by preventing violence against women and girls through effective policies and by
improving access to education and employment (Bangladesh);
107.140 Develop a strategy aimed at promoting women’s equal participation in
public life and decision-making, including through political leadership training
for women and awareness-raising campaigns to dismantle traditional stereotypes
(The Bahamas);
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 19
107.141 Take further measures to promote the full and equal participation of
women in political and public life (Kingdom of the Netherlands);
107.142 Strengthen women’s participation in political life (France);
107.143 Strengthen women’s access to economic resources and opportunities,
through targeted support for women entrepreneurs and measures to advance
women into leadership (Morocco);
107.144 Collect gender-disaggregated data on the impacts of natural disasters
on women and girls to improve protection measures (Kingdom of the
Netherlands);
107.145 Continue expanding outreach programmes and counselling services
for victims of gender-based violence, family tensions or situations of
socioeconomic vulnerability (Cuba);
107.146 Continue strengthening the healthcare and broader multisectoral
services, providing support and assistance to victims of gender-based violence
(Montenegro);
107.147 Strengthen measures to prevent and address violence against women
and children through improved investigations, reporting pathways, and survivor
services (Indonesia);
107.148 Strengthen existing legal frameworks to prevent and respond to
gender-based violence (Iceland);
107.149 Fully implement and enforce domestic violence laws, ensuring that
perpetrators are held accountable and survivors are protected (Cyprus);
107.150 Expand the measures implemented by the police to address domestic
violence, particularly in victim support services (Switzerland);
107.151 Strengthen and adjust its laws and policies in order to increase the
protection of women and girls against domestic violence, including prevention,
and to provide shelter and support for victims (Germany);
107.152 Continue taking steps to address the needs of all survivors of gender-
based violence, including child survivors (Malawi);
107.153 Continue to strengthen its policies combating violence against women
and children (Singapore);
107.154 Repeal any laws or policies permitting corporal punishment in schools
and adopt effective teacher training measures to promote positive, non-violent
discipline at schools (Australia);
107.155 Enact a law to clearly prohibit all corporal punishment of children in
all settings and strengthen child protection systems (Estonia);
107.156 Explicitly prohibit corporal punishment of children and adolescents in
all settings, including at home (Dominican Republic);
107.157 Adopt comprehensive legislation that explicitly prohibits corporal
punishment of children in all settings, including at home, schools and care
institutions, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child; and
develop and implement a comprehensive national strategy against violence
against children (Mexico);
107.158 Amend the Education Act 2011 to unequivocally prohibit the
administration of corporal punishment in any form and in all circumstances
(Italy);
107.159 Amend the Education Act 2011 to fully prohibit corporal punishment
in schools and introduce awareness programmes on its harmful effects, along
with effective alternatives (Sierra Leone);
A/HRC/62/7
20 GE.26-03256
107.160 Eliminate the provisions of the Education Law Amendment Act, which
justify corporal punishment of children, to ensure the best interest of the child,
and promote educational environments that are safe and free from violence
(Chile);
107.161 Strengthen the child protection system by developing and
implementing a comprehensive strategy to eliminate violent disciplinary
methods and promote positive parenting programmes (Uruguay);
107.162 Further strengthen child-protection systems and fully implement its
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including through
the ratification of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict (Slovenia);
107.163 Consider targeted measures for child development, including those
related to establishing a minimum age for employment (India);
107.164 Eradicate child marriage (Iceland);
107.165 Strengthen efforts to prevent child marriage by enforcing existing
laws, raising public awareness and adopting a national action plan (Gambia);
107.166 Establish 18 years of age as the minimum age for marriage, without
exceptions, to protect children and adolescents from such harmful practices that
violate their rights (Chile);
107.167 Strengthen efforts to prevent child marriage, including through
enforcement of the law and awareness-raising initiatives (Portugal);
107.168 Intensify efforts to prevent child marriage, through law enforcement
and awareness-raising, the adoption of a national action plan, expanding access
to sexual and reproductive health services, and advancing comprehensive
sexuality education (Uruguay);
107.169 Upgrade mainstream schools to better accommodate children with
disabilities, and assess barriers faced by women and girls with disabilities in
accessing education and healthcare (Samoa);
107.170 Legalize same-sex marriage between consenting adults (Iceland);
107.171 Make progress in recognizing the rights of same-sex couples and adopt
a law prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity
(Spain);
107.172 Adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation that explicitly
prohibits discrimination against persons of diverse sexual orientation, gender
identity and expression and sex characteristics (Iceland);
107.173 Take immediate measures to ensure that all migrants and asylum-
seekers held in regional processing centres under Nauruan jurisdiction are
treated in full compliance with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, specifically by upgrading
detention conditions to meet international standards (Holy See);
107.174 Strengthen legal and humanitarian safeguards applicable to refugees
and asylum-seekers present in the Nauru regional detention centre
(Switzerland);
107.175 Strengthen the protection of refugees by complying with the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and intensify the search for
durable solutions for asylum-seekers and refugees (Uruguay);
107.176 Increase the efforts for improving the livelihood of refugees and
asylum-seekers in Regional Processing Centre, especially for the women and
children (Islamic Republic of Iran).
A/HRC/62/7
GE.26-03256 21
108. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/62/7
22 GE.26-03256
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Nauru was headed by H.E. Lionel ROUWEN AINGIMEA,
Minister for Justice and Border Control and composed of the following members:
• Ms. Ailene Francilia Kelesi – Spouse of the Minister for Justice and Border Control;
• Ms. Rebecca Amwano – Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade;
• H.E Frederick W. Pitcher – Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Permanent
Mission of the Republic of Nauru to the United Nations and other International
Organizations;
• Ms. Stella Duburiya – Director for Human Rights;
• Ms. Trini Caleb – Director for Child Protection Services;
• Mr. Martin Heyne – Honorary Consul of the Republic of Nauru to Germany;
• Ms. Joanie Ro-lyn Hartman – First Secretary of the Permanent Mission of the
Republic of Nauru to the United Nations and other International Organizations;
• Mr. Ralph Teimisti – Political Advisor;
• Ms. Nina-Marlei Bill – Political Advisor;
• Ms. Kuni Teimisti – Senior Personal Assistant to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Trade;
• Ms. Sarah Lambert – Legal Intern of the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Nauru
to the United Nations and other International Organizations.
