GE.24-23221 (E) 191224 201224
Human Rights Council
Fifty-eighth session
24 February–4 April 2025
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Norway
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/58/4
General Assembly Distr.: General
20 December 2024
Original: English
A/HRC/58/4
2 GE.24-23221
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its forty-seventh session from 4 to 15 November
2024. The review of Norway was held at the 1st meeting, on 4 November 2024. The
delegation of Norway was headed by the State Secretary, Ministry of Justice and Public
Security, Even Eriksen. At its 10th meeting, held on 8 November 2024, the Working Group
adopted the report on Norway.
2. On 10 January 2024, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Norway: Cameroon, Cuba and France.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1
and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Norway:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Angola, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica,
members of the core group of sponsors of the resolutions on the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment (Costa Rica, Maldives and Slovenia), Germany,
Liechtenstein, Panama, Portugal, on behalf of the Group of Friends on national mechanisms
for implementation, reporting and follow-up, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Norway through the troika. These
questions are available on the website of the universal periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The delegation of Norway expressed gratitude for States’ participation in its fourth
universal periodic review, acknowledging the opportunity to assess its human rights
obligations, achievements and areas for improvement. Norway adopted an integrated
approach to implementing and monitoring human rights, led by the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security, which coordinated closely with other ministries and engaged civil society
through public consultations and draft report reviews.
6. In preparing the national report, the Government had held dialogues with the
Sámediggi (Sami Parliament), the Norwegian National Human Rights Institution, the
Parliamentary Ombud, the Ombudsperson for Children and the Equality and
Anti-discrimination Ombud. Norway highlighted its core commitment to human rights and
gender equality, which it integrated into all of its domestic and foreign policies and its
international development.
7. Since its previous review, Norway had ratified key conventions such as the Domestic
Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and
the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
It was considering ratifying the Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court on the crime of aggression (Kampala amendments). Norway aimed to
incorporate the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities into national law and
had initiated a comprehensive review prior to public consultation in 2024.
1 A/HRC/WG.6/47/NOR/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/47/NOR/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/47/NOR/3.
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 3
8. Norway had established the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 2018 to examine
past injustices against the Sami, Kvens/Norwegian Finns and Forest Finns. It had presented
its findings to Parliament in 2023. The delegation highlighted its efforts to combat racism,
discrimination and violence against women and children.
9. Norway prioritized child protection and had amended the Police Act and adopted the
Child Welfare Act to give precedence to children’s best interests. The Government was
currently working on a quality reform of child welfare and on a white paper on safe digital
upbringing for children.
10. The delegation highlighted efforts made to improve juvenile justice, including high
thresholds for imprisonment and restorative justice programmes run by the Norwegian
Mediation Service. Mental health initiatives had been taken to increase access to care, with a
focus on care for children and young people. The European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment had recently noted the positive
conditions in the detention facilities in Norway.
11. In 2023, the Government had initiated an independent investigation into historical
international adoptions, the findings of which would be published before the end of 2025.
The overall purpose was to ascertain whether there had been any illegal or unethical
circumstances in connection with the adoption in Norway of children from other States.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
12. During the interactive dialogue, 99 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
13. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed the Action Plan against Racism and
Discrimination on the Grounds of Ethnicity and Religion.
14. Viet Nam commended the efforts of Norway to combat discrimination and to promote
the rights of persons with disabilities.
15. Zambia commended Norway for amending the Children Act to strengthen the legal
protection of children.
16. Zimbabwe made recommendations.
17. Algeria made recommendations.
18. Armenia positively noted the progress achieved in protecting victims of trafficking,
including children.
19. Australia welcomed the sixth action plan against domestic violence and the steps taken
since 2019 to advance the rights of Indigenous Peoples.
20. Azerbaijan was deeply concerned about persistently negative attitudes and hate
speech against Muslims, Jews, people of African descent, asylum-seekers, Sami and Roma.
21. Bahrain made recommendations.
22. Bangladesh welcomed the ratification of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
23. Belarus made recommendations.
24. Belgium commended Norway for its efforts to tackle domestic violence,
discrimination and hate crime.
25. Bhutan welcomed the Child Welfare Act of 2023 and the Education Act of 2024.
26. Botswana positively noted the inclusion in the definition of rape in the Penal Code of
reference to a lack of free consent.
27. Brazil commended Norway for its commitment to promoting gender equality.
28. Bulgaria recognized the reduction in the wage gap between men and women and the
strengthening of the legal protection of children.
A/HRC/58/4
4 GE.24-23221
29. Burundi appreciated the achievements in terms of gender equality, the accessibility of
healthcare and education for all.
30. Cameroon commended the steps taken to fight terrorism.
31. Canada recognized the commitment of Norway to promoting and protecting human
rights and its efforts to improve transparency and gender equality.
32. Chile commended the progress made on gender and protection of LGBTIQ+ groups,
especially the Penal Code amendment banning so-called conversion therapy.
33. China was concerned about the protection of children, victims of trafficking and
discrimination against people of African descent.
34. Colombia congratulated Norway on its progress since the previous review cycle.
35. Costa Rica highlighted the progress made in upholding the right to privacy by
temporarily banning a major information technology company from using invasive
advertising.
36. Côte d’Ivoire congratulated Norway on its launch in 2022 of an action plan to combat
social dumping and labour-related offences.
37. Croatia welcomed the commitment to promoting human rights in multilateral forums
and the entry into force of the Compensation for Violent Crimes Act.
38. Cuba acknowledged the efforts made to implement recommendations accepted during
previous review cycles.
39. Cyprus commended Norway for increasing the funding allocated to the National
Human Rights Institution and for strengthening gender equality.
40. Czechia welcomed the progress made in providing Roma children with access to
education.
41. Denmark acknowledged the efforts to prevent and combat sexual and gender-based
violence, while noting the prevalence of such violence.
42. The Dominican Republic commended Norway for its ratification of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
43. Ecuador highlighted the implementation of the action plan for equality for persons
with disabilities.
44. Egypt expressed concern about the increase in racism, racial discrimination and hate
speech promoted by far-right political forces.
45. The delegation of Norway stated that the Government considered participation,
inclusion and diversity to be the cornerstones of its society and aligned those efforts with the
Sustainable Development Goals. Following the recommendations it had received on equality
and non-discrimination at the previous review, in 2019, the Government had implemented
progressive policies to promote equal rights and opportunities.
46. The delegation underscored that significant efforts had been made to advance gender
equality. Although the gender pay gap was narrowing, it persisted, with women’s salaries in
2023 representing 88.3 per cent of men’s salaries. Since 2020, all public employers and major
private sector employers had been required to report biennially on wage differences and
involuntary part-time work, by gender. Efforts to reduce part-time work had included
enhanced rights to full-time positions and measures to improve the gender balance in
education and in industries with significant gender disparities. Access to affordable childcare
had also been prioritized, culminating in historically low parental fees for kindergartens in
2024. In 2023, Norway had ratified the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019
(No. 190), and in late 2024, a white paper on sexual harassment would be submitted to
Parliament.
47. In order to ensure equal rights for LGBT+ persons, the Government had launched the
Action Plan on Gender and Sexual Diversity (2023–2026), which had, inter alia, significantly
boosted funding for LGBT+ organizations. A legislative ban on conversion therapy had been
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 5
introduced in 2024. Norway had also been implementing the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities across government levels. By October 2024, 85 municipalities had
either adopted or decided to adopt the TryggEst safeguarding model to protect vulnerable
adults from abuse, neglect and exploitation.
48. Norway had intensified its anti-racism efforts, including by adopting an action plan in
2023 that included measures addressing labour market discrimination and youth challenges.
New action plans targeting antisemitism, anti-Muslim sentiment and discrimination against
Sami people were also under preparation. Hate speech remained prohibited by law and
increased resources had been allocated to efforts to investigate reports of and to prevent hate
speech.
49. Policies designed to strengthen the rights of Indigenous and national minorities,
including the Sami, had been developed through consultations and included legislative
protections and funding for cultural preservation. The Sami Parliament played a pivotal role
in defending the rights of the Sami people, supported by statutory provisions that had been
updated in 2024 to facilitate the use of Sami languages. The Supreme Court ruling in the
Fosen case underscored the importance of Indigenous consent in decisions on land use. The
Government had also made amends for historical injustices toward national minorities and
had supported educational initiatives to raise awareness about Indigenous rights and history.
50. The commitment of Norway to combating antisemitism was demonstrated by the
action plans it had continued to implement since 2016, with the third iteration set to introduce
enhanced education and hate crime detection measures. While significant progress had been
achieved, ongoing efforts were necessary to sustain long-term equality and inclusion.
51. Finland welcomed the Action Plan on Gender and Sexual Diversity (2023–2026),
aimed at securing the rights of and improving the quality of life for LGBT+ persons and
fostering greater acceptance of gender and sexual diversity.
52. Estonia commended the commitment of Norway to international law and to the
protection and promotion of human rights globally, including throughout its development
cooperation, and its efforts to promote gender equality, uphold media freedom and support
the fight against impunity for atrocity crimes.
53. France made recommendations.
54. The Gambia expressed concern about xenophobic and anti-immigrant discourse
online.
55. Georgia commended efforts to prevent and combat violence against women and to
identify and assist victims of trafficking in persons.
56. Germany commended significant strides in gender equality, while noting that further
progress was needed to protect unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors.
57. Ghana acknowledged efforts relating to the right to health and combating
discrimination and hate speech.
58. Greece commended the launch of the Action Plan on Gender and Sexual Diversity
(2023–2026) and the 2023 action plan against racism and discrimination with a focus on
access to and advancement within the labour market and on young people.
59. Iceland welcomed the delegation of Norway and its national report and made
recommendations.
60. India appreciated the efforts to implement recommendations from previous review
cycles.
61. Indonesia acknowledged the progress made in terms of transitional justice, while
expressing concern about acts of hate speech.
62. The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed concern about conditions of detention, the
climate system and the separation of children from their parents.
63. Iraq noted the legislation and policies that Norway had adopted to implement
recommendations from previous review cycles.
A/HRC/58/4
6 GE.24-23221
64. Ireland welcomed the efforts to address discrimination, hate speech and hate crimes,
while regretting the lack of progress in implementing the recommendation made during the
third review cycle to take a consent-centred approach to the crime of rape.
65. Israel expressed concern about the rise in antisemitism in Norway and noted that the
Government was working on a new plan to combat antisemitism.
66. Italy commended initiatives to combat discrimination and the decrease in the prison
population.
67. Japan welcomed the high degree of gender equality in Norway and its ratification of
the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
68. Jordan appreciated the efforts of Norway to implement recommendations from the
third review cycle.
69. Kazakhstan praised the measures taken to combat hate crime and domestic violence
and to ensure gender equality.
70. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic praised the improvements in gender equality
and the protection of children’s rights.
71. Lebanon commended Norway for its promotion of international humanitarian law and
its contributions to peacekeeping, including to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
72. Libya thanked the delegation for its report and made recommendations.
73. Lithuania welcomed the significant progress made in ensuring the safety of children,
both online and offline.
74. Luxembourg welcomed the efforts of Norway to implement recommendations from
the previous review cycle.
75. Malawi expressed appreciation for the comprehensive presentation made by Norway
and made recommendations.
76. Malaysia commended initiatives to boost women’s leadership, address climate change
and integrate human rights into business.
77. Maldives applauded the Education Act and the ratification of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
78. Malta welcomed, inter alia, the enactment of legislation banning so-called conversion
therapy for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons.
79. Mauritius congratulated Norway on its national escalation plan against violence and
abuse against children and domestic violence, and its contributions to the Voluntary
Technical Assistance Trust Fund to Support the Participation of Least Developed Countries
and Small Island Developing States in the Work of the Human Rights Council.
80. Mexico acknowledged the launch of the Action Plan on Gender and Sexual Diversity
(2023–2026).
81. Mongolia welcomed the national escalation plan against violence and abuse against
children and domestic violence (2024–2028).
82. Montenegro praised achievements in gender equality, while noting that violence
against women continued to be perpetrated in Norway.
83. Morocco applauded the adoption of the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Act,
prohibiting direct and indirect discrimination.
84. Namibia commended Norway for its official development assistance and for its high
level of gender equality.
85. Nepal took positive note of the Environmental Information Act, aimed at ensuring
public access to environmental information.
86. The delegation of Norway said that it strove to receive the high number of immigrants
who arrived on its territory in a way that upheld the human rights of foreign citizens and
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 7
migrants. The Government aimed for a responsible and predictable immigration policy
aligned with its international obligations, ensuring protection for persons in need based on
the principle of fair and humane treatment of all applicants.
87. Efforts had focused on protecting unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors, a
particularly vulnerable group. Facilities catered to their age-specific needs, with specialized
care for those aged under 15 managed by the Child Welfare Service. In 2022, a new oversight
mechanism for centres housing minors aged over 15 had been introduced, leading to
improvements in areas identified during inspections.
88. Norway maintained its commitment to the principle of non-refoulement, ensuring that
asylum applications were individually assessed. Persons requiring protection were granted
asylum, while others were encouraged to leave voluntarily or with assistance. Those who did
not comply faced deportation and, if necessary, were housed in the Police Immigration
Detention Centre, where conditions had been improved by easing restrictions.
89. The police received training, pursuant to the 2022–2025 national action plan for the
police on diversity, dialogue and trust, which aimed to ensure equal services for all groups in
society. Attention was paid to how personal checks were conducted in practice and how they
were perceived by citizens. In 2023, a pilot scheme had been conducted in Oslo to document
personal checks, but evaluations had indicated its limited impact on public trust. The need
for further training for the police had been recognized.
90. To combat hate crime, a National Competence Centre on Hate Crime had been
established in 2021 to bolster police capabilities in investigation, prosecution and victim
assistance. Despite the challenges faced in distinguishing lawful speech from hate crime, the
Centre had been providing essential guidance.
91. Trafficking in persons remained an issue, predominantly affecting foreign citizens.
While prostitution levels had declined in the wake of the criminalization of the purchase of
sexual services, collaboration between the police, labour inspectors and other authorities was
essential to address cases of forced labour and exploitative practices in workplaces.
92. The police protected all children from violence and threats within families and were
particularly concerned about children who lived in a violent and controlling environment.
Physical punishment and violence of any kind within families, directed against children or
adults, were not tolerated in Norway. The model developed by the police in Oslo to assess
the level of threat of family violence and take preventive measures combined police, social,
healthcare and psychological expertise, and focused on raising awareness of both victims and
perpetrators. It had proved successful and was to be extended to other police districts in the
future.
93. Reforms had been made in the child welfare sector to address procedural flaws that
had been identified by the European Court of Human Rights. The 2023 Child Welfare Act
prioritized prevention and early intervention to protect children’s best interests and aimed to
reunite families where possible. An ongoing quality reform aimed to strengthen legal
safeguards throughout the child welfare system, with legislative changes expected in 2025.
94. The Kingdom of the Netherlands commended Norway for combating sexual abuse
and domestic violence, while expressing concern about barriers to establishing new schools.
95. New Zealand welcomed the progress in developing an action plan for equality for
persons with disabilities.
96. The Niger appreciated the efforts of Norway to guarantee the right to inclusive
education for girls, minorities, Indigenous Peoples and migrants.
97. Oman noted the efforts of Norway in the fields of education and mental health.
98. Pakistan commended Norway for its progress on gender equality.
99. Panama welcomed Norway and made recommendations.
100. Paraguay appreciated the efforts of Norway to review the provisions in the Penal Code
relating to sexual offences.
A/HRC/58/4
8 GE.24-23221
101. The Philippines noted the steps taken to stem gender-based violence, racism and all
forms of discrimination.
102. Poland commended Norway for the new Children Act and the action plan to combat
ethnic discrimination and hatred.
103. Portugal commended Norway for, inter alia, its plans to address violence against
children.
104. Qatar praised Norway for its efforts to fight racism and discrimination, while
expressing concern about the increase in hate speech, discrimination and racism
105. The Republic of Korea commended Norway for its efforts to create an inclusive
environment for Indigenous Peoples and national minorities
106. Romania noted the progress Norway had made on equality, freedom of expression
and its development cooperation policy.
107. The Russian Federation noted the tendency to remove children who were not of
Norwegian origin from their families and expressed concern about violations of prison rights.
108. Sierra Leone commended Norway for its immigration and education policies and the
level of gender equality.
109. Slovakia commended Norway on its promotion of human rights worldwide, while
expressing concern about the length of legal proceedings.
110. Slovenia commended Norway for ratifying the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
111. South Africa commended Norway for its efforts to promote human rights and its
recognition of the State of Palestine.
112. South Sudan welcomed Norway and made recommendations.
113. Spain congratulated Norway on its approval of several action plans for the protection
of human rights.
114. The State of Palestine expressed its heartfelt gratitude to Norway for its unwavering
and principled support.
115. The Sudan welcomed the adoption of the national human rights action plans.
116. Sweden welcomed the commitment of Norway to the protection of human rights,
nationally and internationally.
117. Thailand commended Norway for its efforts to protect human rights, including gender
equality, and its cooperation in humanitarian affairs.
118. Timor-Leste commended advancements in gender-based violence, trafficking in
persons and climate action.
119. Togo welcomed the significant progress Norway had made since the previous review
cycle.
120. Türkiye welcomed the legislative amendments to prevent coercion in mental health
services and emphasized the need for balanced child welfare decisions.
121. Ukraine commended Norway for its commitment to safeguarding human rights and
its support for Ukraine.
122. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the report of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
123. The United Republic of Tanzania commended Norway for its gender equality and the
measures it had taken to combat hate crimes.
124. The United States of America applauded Norway for its commitment to advancing
human rights and supporting human rights defenders.
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 9
125. Vanuatu welcomed the 2023 Child Welfare Act focusing on prevention and child
protection.
126. The delegation of Norway recognized inmates’ rights to the same healthcare services
as the general population, including specialist and municipal care. Given the prevalence of
mental health issues among prisoners, an independent committee had been established in
June 2023 to review the treatment of prisoners with severe mental disorders and
developmental disabilities, which was set to submit its findings by March 2025. In May 2023,
a new unit had been established at Ila prison to improve conditions for prisoners subjected to
prolonged exclusion from the general prison population due to aggravated or particular
behaviour, providing them with meaningful companionship and activities.
127. Following the rejection by Parliament in 2022 of a proposal to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure, the
Government had focused on ensuring that children had easy access to effective national
complaint procedures. It had taken steps to raise children’s awareness of their rights to appeal
and to be heard on issues affecting them, pursuant to article 104 of the Constitution.
128. Norway had co-sponsored several resolutions recognizing the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment. Section 112 of the Constitution established that right
and the Government had taken several measures to uphold it, including by conducting
environmental impact assessments and drawing up a new climate strategy for consultation.
129. While the level of trafficking in persons in Norway was relatively low, the
Government had reinforced its zero-tolerance stance to that vile crime. A national
anti-trafficking strategy had been launched in June 2024.
130. Norway maintained its decision not to ratify the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, as it
reiterated provisions already in other conventions that Norway had ratified. Moreover, the
wording of the Convention was vague and imprecise on several points, making it difficult to
clarify the consequences and obligations that ratification would entail.
131. The delegation reiterated the Government’s commitment to combating racism,
antisemitism and discrimination and to reducing the incidence of violence against women,
based on recommendations received during the review.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
132. The following recommendations will be examined by Norway, which will provide
responses in due time, but no later than the fifty-eighth session of the Human Rights
Council:
132.1 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Azerbaijan);
132.2 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Egypt);
132.3 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Libya);
132.4 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Morocco);
132.5 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrants Workers and Members of Their Families (South Sudan);
132.6 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
(Bangladesh);
132.7 Ratify the various conventions, namely the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
A/HRC/58/4
10 GE.24-23221
Members of Their Families and the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Togo);
132.8 Continue cooperation with the human rights mechanisms by
welcoming visits from special procedures (Algeria);
132.9 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure
(Algeria);
132.10 Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Niger);
132.11 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure and
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (Paraguay);
132.12 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (Ghana);
132.13 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (South Sudan);
132.14 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Malta);
132.15 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Namibia);
132.16 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Cyprus);
132.17 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Malawi);
132.18 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Maldives) (Namibia) (Portugal);
132.19 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Finland) (Malawi);
132.20 Consider further the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure, the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (Italy);
132.21 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure and the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Spain);
132.22 Incorporate the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights into its domestic legal order with equal constitutional rank to
that of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (South Sudan);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 11
132.23 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Chile) (Mongolia);
132.24 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (Côte d’Ivoire);
132.25 Reconsider the decision to incorporate the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities into Norwegian law (Sierra Leone);
132.26 Finalize the incorporation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities into national legislation (Ukraine);
132.27 Incorporate the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
into the Human Rights Act to strengthen the rights and protection of people with
disabilities (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
132.28 Continue incorporating the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities into its laws and policy and take the necessary measures to ensure
effective implementation of the Convention across the country (Thailand);
132.29 Incorporate the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
into national law and fully harmonize the normative framework with the
Convention (Montenegro);
132.30 Ratify the Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court on the crime of aggression (Estonia);
132.31 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia);
132.32 Consider ratifying the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
(Timor-Leste);
132.33 Continue with all efforts for protecting and promoting human rights,
both domestically and internationally (Malawi);
132.34 Ensure the prompt, full and effective implementation of the “Safety for
all 2024–2028” action plan (Denmark);
132.35 Undertake inclusive national consultations to establish a national
mechanism for implementation, reporting and follow-up, taking into
consideration the Marrakech Guidance Framework as a reference guide, to
collate, coordinate, and track domestic progress on the implementation of
recommendations from all international human rights mechanisms (Morocco);
132.36 Establish a national mechanism for implementation, reporting and
follow-up (Portugal);
132.37 Establish a national mechanism for implementation, reporting and
follow-up of recommendations on human rights, considering the possibility of
receiving cooperation for this purpose (Paraguay);
132.38 Broaden measures to combat discrimination, particularly for
vulnerable groups, to foster a more inclusive society (Viet Nam);
132.39 Strengthen measures aimed at strengthening equality and improving
the status of migrants and people of African descent (Algeria);
132.40 Address multiple and intersectional forms of discrimination against
at-risk groups, including women and girls, Indigenous Peoples, ethnic minorities
and people with disability (Australia);
132.41 Intensify efforts to combat all forms of discrimination, including racial
and ethnic discrimination, faced by migrants and ethnic groups (Chile);
132.42 Redouble efforts to combat discrimination and racism within society
(Bahrain);
A/HRC/58/4
12 GE.24-23221
132.43 Pursue justice and appeal in discrimination and harassment cases
(Bahrain);
132.44 Take further measures, including legislative mechanisms, to root out
racism, racial discrimination and hate crimes (Bangladesh);
132.45 Take additional measures to combat manifestations of antisemitism,
Islamophobia, racism and neo-Nazism, as well as manifestations of hatred and
hostility on the Internet, including on the basis of religion and ethnic origin
(Belarus);
132.46 Combat racial discrimination, xenophobia and hate crimes (China);
132.47 Strengthen the application of laws prohibiting discrimination against
people with migrant origins in accessing basic services and the full exercise of
their human rights (Ecuador);
132.48 Enact the necessary legislation and laws to address the rising levels of
racism, hate speech, xenophobia and Islamophobia (Egypt);
132.49 Address concerns about the prevalence of some forms of institutional
racism to effectively advance efforts aimed at ensuring inclusivity and equality
(Ghana);
132.50 Revise the concerned legislations that have led to ethnic profiling by
law enforcement authorities and ensure that practices that could lead to
discriminatory treatment on the basis of physical appearance, colour or ethnic
or national origin are prevented (India);
132.51 Ensure the effective implementation of action plans to address racism
and discrimination, including measures against anti-Muslim hatred (Indonesia);
132.52 Take further measures to combat hate speech, especially Islamophobia
and xenophobia and combat those crimes, including by building and
strengthening the capacity of the police to play their role in this regard (Iraq);
132.53 Continue to expand the competence-boosting measures related to hate
crime being implemented for law enforcement officials (Japan);
132.54 Continue national efforts to combat racism and racial discrimination
by supporting national action plans and local and regional activities aimed at
promoting anti-racism and enhancing diversity and dialogue (Jordan);
132.55 Continue national efforts to combat hate speech, and continue training
staff investigating issues of combating hate speech and incitement and
supporting the work of the National Competence Centre on Hate Crime
(Jordan);
132.56 Take measures in order to tackle hate speech against Muslims and
minorities (Libya);
132.57 Enhance the mechanisms to prevent acts of hate speech directed
against minority groups, including religious minorities (Lithuania);
132.58 Strengthen legal frameworks to address hate speech and implement
mechanisms to monitor and counter online and offline hate speech targeting
religious minorities (Malaysia);
132.59 Expedite the development and implementation of a comprehensive
action plan to combat Islamophobia and a monitoring system for discriminatory
practices (Malaysia);
132.60 Fully enforce the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Act, which
prohibits direct and indirect discrimination, ensuring that all complaints
involving racial discrimination are investigated effectively and by banning racist
organizations (Morocco);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 13
132.61 Accelerate the implementation of the Action Plan against Racism and
Discrimination on the Grounds of Ethnicity and Religion, ensuring the active
participation of affected groups, to ensure greater inclusion and effective
prevention of racist acts (Morocco);
132.62 Continue efforts aimed at promoting the integration of migrants and
countering and combating discrimination and hate crimes based on race and
religion against all minorities, including Muslims (Pakistan);
132.63 Redouble efforts to combat racial discrimination, racism, hate speech,
incitement and related crimes and prosecute and punish perpetrators (Qatar);
132.64 Continue efforts to combat hate speech and hate crimes both online
and offline through capacity-building within law enforcement and raising public
awareness (Republic of Korea);
132.65 Put in place regulations that prohibit officials from using hate speech
in their activities within and outside government institutions (Russian
Federation);
132.66 Continue promoting gender equality, particularly achieving gender
balance in education and ensuring equality in both public and private
employment sectors (Sierra Leone);
132.67 Ensure that hate crimes are sufficiently distinct from other crimes in
terms of their data recording (South Africa);
132.68 Continue its commendable efforts in promoting equality and prevent
discrimination in all areas of society (State of Palestine);
132.69 Compile and publish data on reported hate crime, including racist and
xenophobic hate crime, hate crime against persons belonging to religious groups
and LGBTIQ-related hate crime (Sweden);
132.70 Continue implementing policies to ensure equality between women
and men so as to achieve greater gender balance in leadership positions (United
Republic of Tanzania);
132.71 Ensure that conditions of detention and prisoner access to healthcare
meet international standards, including full access to gender-sensitive and
mental health services (Canada);
132.72 Amend legislation to grant all prisoners a minimum eight hours a day
outside the cell and ensure that inmates can be kept in solitary confinement only
in exceptional cases (Czechia);
132.73 Take further measures to ensure that solitary confinement of detainees
is only used in exceptional cases, when strictly necessary, and that they have
access to communication during the investigative process (Greece);
132.74 Revise current standards on solitary confinement for prisoners, which
should be used only in exceptional cases (India);
132.75 Restrict solitary confinement to only exceptional cases, where
absolutely necessary (Islamic Republic of Iran);
132.76 Take steps to amend legislation on solitary confinement as
recommended by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Ireland);
132.77 Redouble its much-needed efforts in support of international
humanitarian law worldwide, and more particularly in the Middle East
(Lebanon);
132.78 Continue to improve legislative and operational mechanisms for the
identification and prosecution of individuals involved in financing and
supporting terrorism (Cameroon);
A/HRC/58/4
14 GE.24-23221
132.79 Take additional measures with the aim of fighting against corruption
at all levels, including by fully implementing recommendations from relevant
multilateral bodies (Croatia);
132.80 Continue its commendable efforts in upholding the responsibility of
third States for internationally wrongful acts (State of Palestine);
132.81 Amend criminal legislation to ensure that the definition of rape focuses
on the lack of free consent and not the existence of violence, in accordance with
international standards and the State’s obligations under the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) (Colombia);
132.82 Adapt the definition of the crime of rape to international standards,
basing it on the lack of consent (Costa Rica);
132.83 Strengthen legal aid services to ensure equitable access to justice
(Viet Nam);
132.84 Take effective measures to prevent and punish hate speech online and
offline (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
132.85 Develop and enact rules that prohibit the use of hate speech and
prosecute acts of violence and vandalism against migrants (Azerbaijan);
132.86 Enhance measures to combat hate speech and hate crimes, with a focus
on effective implementation of existing action plans (Germany);
132.87 Increase efforts to reduce hate speech (United Republic of Tanzania);
132.88 Develop and strengthen programmes to provide visas and temporary
stays to human rights defenders facing deteriorating conditions in their home
country (Czechia);
132.89 Develop and strengthen programmes to provide visas and temporary
stays to human rights defenders from countries that do not respect the right to
promote and protect human rights (Poland);
132.90 Provide for conscientious objection to military service for professional
soldiers and reservists in accordance with international human rights standards
and process asylum applications from objectors in accordance with the
Guidelines on International Protection No. 10 of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (Costa Rica);
132.91 Adopt and implement the International Holocaust Remembrance
Alliance working definition of antisemitism (Israel);
132.92 Train law enforcement and education officials in the detection and
prosecution of antisemitic hate speech and actions (Israel);
132.93 Strengthen awareness-raising on the right to bodily autonomy,
including in primary and secondary education (Slovenia);
132.94 Ensure that the right to private and family life is duly implemented, in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other applicable
international human rights treaties (Vanuatu);
132.95 Take measures to promote the right to private and family life in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and to ensure that
the removal of children from parental care is used as a measure of last resort
(Zimbabwe);
132.96 Take appropriate steps to ensure that cultural misrepresentation does
not lead to family separations or children being put into foster care, particularly
among immigrant families (India);
132.97 Enhance protections for family unity by limiting separation to a last
resort in the child’s best interests, establish clear guidelines and oversight to
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 15
prevent unnecessary separations, and ensure equitable access to rights and
essential services for migrants and people of African descent (Islamic Republic
of Iran);
132.98 Ensure that children who are separated from their families are not
prematurely placed in long-term care and, where appropriate, are allowed to
have regular contact with their parents with a view to ensuring family
reintegration and prevent family separation (Vanuatu);
132.99 Strengthen efforts to enhance protection and support for the family as
the natural and fundamental unit of society (Egypt);
132.100 Support the family and adopt policies and plans to support and protect
it, while considering the best interest of the child and limit cases of separation of
children from their families (Libya);
132.101 Review the Child Welfare Act concerning family contact rights and
other aspects of the reunification goal (Türkiye);
132.102 Adopt a legal definition of rape in the Penal Code that places the lack
of freely given consent at its centre (Ireland);
132.103 Identify and address the root causes of the removal of children from
parental care, ensure that removals are only used as a measure of last resort, and
provide parents with the necessary support to exercise their parental role in the
upbringing and education of their children (Gambia);
132.104 Strengthen efforts to address trafficking in persons, building the
capacity of law enforcement personnel and building on best practices (Bahrain);
132.105 Intensify its efforts to protect the rights of victims of human trafficking
(Bangladesh);
132.106 Investigate, prosecute and ensure that those responsible for trafficking
in persons are prosecuted (Botswana);
132.107 Provide multisectoral capacity-building programmes for the judiciary
and law enforcement officials on the strict application of anti-trafficking
legislation (Botswana);
132.108 Take effective measures to combat trafficking in persons and enforced
disappearance and effectively protect the rights of migrants and refugees
(China);
132.109 Strengthen the criminal response to human trafficking and ensure that
human trafficking victims are properly identified and assisted, including by
offering psychological support and legal aid free of charge (Croatia);
132.110 Take additional measures to strengthen the combating of the crime of
trafficking in persons, prosecute perpetrators, ensure the rights of victims and
provide them with protection and assistance (Qatar);
132.111 Repeal legislation and practices restricting the legal capacity of
persons with disabilities and remove functional capacity standards throughout
Norwegian law (Bahrain);
132.112 Continue efforts to ensure equal opportunities for women and men in
the labour market (Burundi);
132.113 Continue working to ensure the effective implementation of criminal
and administrative legislation for the prevention of sexual harassment in the
workplace (Chile);
132.114 Continue efforts to ensure the right to inclusive education for women
with a minority background, including migrant women, and to improve the
possibilities for them to enter the labour market (Finland);
A/HRC/58/4
16 GE.24-23221
132.115 Strengthen the enforcement of laws on discrimination against
migrants and people of African descent, reinforce educational programmes
aimed at challenging stereotypes, prejudices and discrimination, and take
targeted measures to improve their equitable access to employment (Gambia);
132.116 Continue efforts to reduce gender segregation in the labour market
and the gender pay gap (Nepal);
132.117 Redouble its efforts to further reduce income inequality and eradicate
poverty, particularly child poverty (Japan);
132.118 Ensure sexual and reproductive health and rights by guaranteeing free
and universal access to contraceptives for all persons (Portugal);
132.119 Ensure safe and accessible abortion in the ongoing abortion reform,
and in particular ensure services are available at primary healthcare level across
the country (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);
132.120 Review national guidelines for the provision of quality health services
(Cuba);
132.121 Continue to promote good mental health and preventive work for
adolescents and adults (Oman);
132.122 Take further steps to reduce the use of coercion in mental healthcare
and strengthen legislation (Türkiye);
132.123 Continue to implement measures to ensure the right to inclusive
education, vocational training, language training and employment services for
women and girls, minorities and migrants (Zimbabwe);
132.124 Continue its efforts to ensure the right to inclusive education for girls,
minorities, persons with disabilities, Indigenous Peoples and migrants
(Armenia);
132.125 Continue its efforts to promote inclusive education for all (Mauritius);
132.126 Ensure the right to inclusive education for girls, minorities, Indigenous
Peoples and migrants (Costa Rica);
132.127 Continue its efforts to ensure the right to inclusive education for girls,
minorities, Indigenous Peoples and migrants (South Sudan);
132.128 Continue efforts to reduce the school dropout rate among children
from disadvantaged families and to guarantee the right to inclusive education for
girls at all levels (Burundi);
132.129 Consider the possibility of making pre-primary education free for at
least one year (Armenia);
132.130 Take further steps to strengthen the right to education
comprehensively in legislation and introduce legislation to make pre-primary
education free and compulsory for at least one year (Kazakhstan);
132.131 Adopt a law to ensure that preschool education is free and compulsory
for at least one year (Panama);
132.132 Enshrine the right to education in legislation and adopt a law making
preschool and school education free of charge (Togo);
132.133 Revise the Independent Schools Act to ensure the right to establish new
schools without any obstructions from local authorities (Kingdom of the
Netherlands);
132.134 Advance the economic, social and cultural rights of the Sami people,
including in relation to land, language and education (Australia);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 17
132.135 Consider ratifying the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to
Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise
Print Disabled (Mauritius);
132.136 Redouble its efforts to reduce carbon emissions to meet its Paris
Agreement target, and strengthen international cooperation in addressing
climate change and its negative impacts for the protection of human rights
(Bangladesh);
132.137 Continue pursuing an active and comprehensive climate policy in
keeping global temperature rise below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C (Bhutan);
132.138 Review its energy and climate change policies, in particular its policy
on the extraction and export of oil and gas, as well as the activities of State-owned
companies and private companies, taking into account the disproportionately
negative impact both within and outside the country, with a view to radically
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in line with the Paris Agreement (Dominican
Republic);
132.139 Review energy and climate-related policies with a view to further
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in line with the Paris Agreement (Maldives);
132.140 Implement deep, rapid and sustained reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions in line with the 1.5 °C target, and add a strong voice to advance
meaningful climate action anchored in the principles of equity and climate justice
(Philippines);
132.141 Update the Climate Change Act to reflect the new nationally
determined contribution to reduce emissions by at least 55 per cent by 2030 and
take concrete steps to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 (Panama);
132.142 Strengthen actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change and protect
biodiversity in the ocean, with a human rights-based approach and in line with
the implementation of the human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment (Costa Rica);
132.143 Strengthen climate adaptation through stakeholder consultations to
support at-risk communities and ensure a healthy environment for all
(Indonesia);
132.144 Empower, support and protect environmental human rights defenders
(Costa Rica);
132.145 Consider scaling up climate finance (Nepal);
132.146 Continue environmental conservation policies and responding to
climate change challenges (Sudan);
132.147 Continue efforts to strengthen the institutional and operational status
of foreign aid and development assistance to developing and least developed
countries (Sudan);
132.148 Ensure full and effective implementation of its National Action Plan
for the Implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
(Mongolia);
132.149 Continue to implement the National Action Plan for the
implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, and
ensure that Norwegian companies and companies based in Norway are held
accountable for the human rights impact of their activities (Qatar);
132.150 Increase the application of the Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights among the private sector and take the necessary measures to
prevent, reduce and redress the adverse impact on human rights and the
environment of business operations (Thailand);
A/HRC/58/4
18 GE.24-23221
132.151 Ensure thorough human rights risk assessments by business entities
operating overseas, and strengthen its capacity to assess human rights risks
within their host countries (Brazil);
132.152 Ensure that companies conduct due diligence on the human rights
risks associated with natural resource exploitation and export activities, making
this a primary consideration, particularly in the countries where these companies
operate (Luxembourg);
132.153 Adopt relevant legislation, with a monitoring mechanism, to ensure
that businesses are held accountable for the impact of their activities on women’s
rights and on environmental degradation (Dominican Republic);
132.154 Actively participate in the negotiations on an international legally
binding instrument on business and human rights within the framework of the
working group established pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 26/9
(Ecuador);
132.155 Refrain from applying or supporting unilateral coercive measures that
have a transnational negative impact on the enjoyment of human rights
(Belarus);
132.156 Continue actions aimed at ensuring gender equality and the
empowerment of women (Cuba);
132.157 Continue efforts to promote gender equality (Pakistan);
132.158 Intensify efforts to achieve gender equality in the labour context,
including equal pay (Iraq);
132.159 Intensify its efforts towards a more gender-equal labour market,
including by implementing measures to encourage full-time employment and
women’s presence in sectors where they are still underrepresented (Lebanon);
132.160 Strengthen national measures to advance a gender balance in
education and the labour market (Lao People’s Democratic Republic);
132.161 Sustain and further promote gender equality in education and the
labour market to empower women across all sectors, strengthening their
participation and leadership opportunities (Republic of Korea);
132.162 Intensify efforts to promote gender equality and support workforce
participation, especially for women from minority backgrounds (Indonesia);
132.163 Provide systematic capacity-building for the judiciary and law
enforcement officials on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Optional Protocol thereto and the general
recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (Montenegro);
132.164 Provide systematic and mandatory capacity-building for judges,
prosecutors, lawyers and law enforcement officials on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Optional
Protocol thereto and the general recommendations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Dominican Republic);
132.165 Adopt a legal definition of rape in the Penal Code that places the
absence of consent at its centre (Australia) (Kingdom of the Netherlands) (New
Zealand);
132.166 Amend the definition of rape so that it is based on lack of consent
instead of use of force or threat, in line with international standards (Belgium);
132.167 Amend the definition of rape in article 291 of the Norwegian Penal
Code to ensure the inclusion of absence of free consent as a basis for establishing
the crime, aligning it with international standards (Iceland);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 19
132.168 Align the definition of rape with international standards, basing it on
the lack of consent rather than use of force or threat (Namibia);
132.169 Amend the Penal Code with a view to repealing article 316 and adapt
the definition of rape established in article 291 to international standards, basing
it on the lack of consent (Panama);
132.170 Redefine the crime of rape under its domestic legislation, anchoring it
in the absence of consent rather than use of, or the threat of use of, force
(Philippines);
132.171 Amend national legislation to include the consent-based definition of
rape, in line with the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Slovenia);
132.172 Revise the definition of rape in the Penal Code to encompass the
absence of free consent (South Africa);
132.173 Bring the definition of rape in article 291 of the Penal Code into line
with international standards, basing it on lack of consent rather than on the use
or threat of force (Spain);
132.174 Strengthen measures to combat domestic and sexual violence
(Belarus);
132.175 Continue the implementation and monitoring of measures to combat
gender-based violence, domestic violence and sexual abuse and provide support
for victims (Belgium);
132.176 Intensify efforts to address violence against women and girls by
increasing investment in prevention and comprehensive support services,
including crisis services adapted to vulnerable groups (Canada);
132.177 Strengthen measures to address the widespread increase in violence
against women, paying particular attention to sexual violence and rape cases,
ensuring adequate resources for prevention, protection and support for victims
(Chile);
132.178 Enhance resources for domestic violence prevention, including shelters
and support services for victims (Viet Nam);
132.179 Increase efforts aimed at the prevention of gender-based violence
against women and ensure that women leaving abusive marriages have sufficient
support structures (Zambia);
132.180 Take measures to strengthen protection from domestic violence,
violence in the name of “honour” and other related violence against women and
children, especially girls (Croatia);
132.181 Establish robust measures to address violence against women, improve
the investigation and prosecution process, and increase access to shelters and
support services for victims of domestic violence (Islamic Republic of Iran);
132.182 Continue efforts towards implementing the national plan against
violence and abuse against children and domestic violence (Lao People’s
Democratic Republic);
132.183 Continue to strengthen the national escalation plan against violence
and abuse against children and domestic violence (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela);
132.184 Implement measures to prevent and combat domestic and sexual
gender-based violence against women and children, including by ensuring that
perpetrators are prosecuted and held accountable (Sweden);
132.185 Strengthen efforts to address and reduce violence against women and
girls, including domestic violence, and ensure that perpetrators are prosecuted
and convicted (Bahrain);
A/HRC/58/4
20 GE.24-23221
132.186 Continue to strengthen efforts to combat gender-based violence, hate
crime and discrimination faced by migrants and minorities (Zimbabwe);
132.187 Step up its efforts to prevent gender-based violence against women,
including by conducting awareness-raising campaigns (Mongolia);
132.188 Strengthen the resources allocated to crisis centres for victims of
violence and encourage inter-institutional monitoring of these centres (France);
132.189 Continue its efforts to identify, prevent and combat violence against
women and girls, while recognizing its disproportionate prevalence among
Indigenous women and women with a minority background (Lebanon);
132.190 Intensify efforts aimed at improving the provision of services to
vulnerable groups experiencing domestic violence and substance abuse
(Georgia);
132.191 Intensify efforts towards the prevention of gender-based violence
against women (Iceland);
132.192 Increase efforts towards the prevention of gender-based violence,
especially through awareness-raising at all levels, including the promotion of
zero tolerance of violence in schools (Cyprus);
132.193 Strengthen research into the risk of gender-based violence to which
Sami women are exposed (Ecuador);
132.194 Integrate a gender-sensitive approach to violence against women into
the design, development and evaluation of laws, policies and measures to prevent
and combat all forms of violence covered by the Istanbul Convention (Iceland);
132.195 Continue to strengthen legislative and policy measures to address all
forms of sexual and gender-based violence (New Zealand);
132.196 Strengthen investigative capacity and training within law enforcement
on gender-based violence, domestic and sexual violence, and increase support for
protection of survivors (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland);
132.197 Take further steps to ensure proper investigation of and accountability
for acts of gender-based violence, including spousal abuse, and identify and
address issues that may prevent convictions of offenders (United States of
America);
132.198 Ensure that the decisions of the Child Welfare Service are compliant
with the human rights of both the parents and the child, taking fully into
consideration the relevant European Court of Human Rights judgments, and
guarantee broad and effective communication with foreign consular authorities
on cases involving their respective nationals (Italy);
132.199 Take further action, including by amending legislation, in view of
guaranteeing the Child Welfare Service’s compliance with the human rights of
the parents and the child, taking into consideration the requirements arising
from international law, in particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms (European Convention on Human Rights) (Romania);
132.200 Undertake efforts to address disparities in child welfare services to
ensure equitable access to child protection and family services, including for
children from minority groups (Malaysia);
132.201 Ensure the compliance of the Child Welfare Service with the human
rights of both the parents and the child, taking fully into consideration the
relevant European Court of Human Rights judgments (Estonia);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 21
132.202 Take measures to ensure the Child Welfare Service’ s compliance with
the human rights of both the parents and the child, taking into consideration the
relevant European Court of Human Rights judgments (Greece);
132.203 Ensure all child welfare services develop their intercultural
competence and sensitivity and build up a sustainable exchange to promote
mutual understanding and trust with minority groups (Azerbaijan);
132.204 Apply the principle of the best interests of the child both in its
legislation and in the procedures for adopting judicial and administrative
decisions that affect children (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
132.205 Incorporate the principle of the best interests of the child in all
legislation and judicial and administrative decision-making procedures affecting
children (Paraguay);
132.206 Reconsider the child protection system, which should give priority to
the best interests of the child, as stipulated in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child (India);
132.207 Ensure that the best interests of the child are placed at the core of its
policies in relation to child welfare, and that adequate safeguards are available
to guarantee compliance with the fundamental rights of both parents and
children (Belgium);
132.208 Consider ensuring the principle of the best interest of the child in all
legislation and the judicial and administrative decision-making procedures
affecting children (Kazakhstan);
132.209 Continue its efforts in addressing child welfare (Bhutan);
132.210 Take more effective measures to protect the rights of children,
including in the context of resolving conflict situations around the removal of
children from their parents. Take measures to improve the competence of
employees of guardianship authorities (Belarus);
132.211 Ensure that children separated from their families can interact
regularly with their parents, and take measures to ensure that poverty is not the
only reason for removing a child from parental care (Russian Federation);
132.212 Continue addressing properly cases of the removal of children from
parental care (Poland);
132.213 Immediately provide foreign diplomatic missions in Norway with
information on all cases of separation of children who are foreign citizens from
their parents, deprivation of parental rights of biological parents who are foreign
citizens and restriction of contact rights of biological parents who are foreign
citizens with their separated children (Bulgaria);
132.214 Create and provide legal powers to the commission that will be
responsible for the review and analysis of cases of violence against and abuse and
serious neglect of children (Cuba);
132.215 Ensure that municipal Child Protection Services (Barnevernet), when
considering cases of children with foreign citizenship, duly take into account the
national characteristics, culture and traditions of the child and their family
(Bulgaria);
132.216 Implement the Children Act, also taking into consideration the
relevant European Court of Human Rights judgments (Cyprus);
132.217 Enhance efforts to ensure the welfare and reunification of children in
custodial care, in accordance with relevant European Court of Human Rights
judgments (Sweden);
132.218 Incorporate new actions into the Escalation Plan for Mental Health to
resolve problems affecting children and young people (Cuba);
A/HRC/58/4
22 GE.24-23221
132.219 Continue to develop and implement dedicated policies to ensure child
safety in the digital space (Lithuania);
132.220 Create a safe digital environment for children through the
introduction of a regulation to increase awareness and prevent online
exploitation of children (Malaysia);
132.221 Improve the conditions of unaccompanied minors aged under 15 in
reception services in order to guarantee their rights (France);
132.222 Advance in the improvement of the child welfare system to ensure
family integrity in the context of our concern that the administrative route is
being prioritized over the judicial one (Spain);
132.223 Continue to promote children’s rights to care and protection (Oman);
132.224 Strengthen the levels of transparency, supervision and diversity within
the child welfare system to ensure that the right to family life is duly safeguarded,
in the best interest of the child, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child (Gambia);
132.225 Raise the level of transparency, oversight and expertise in the child
social protection system (Russian Federation);
132.226 Strengthen training for child protection service staff and improve
inspection systems for foster families (France);
132.227 Advance its national mechanisms for combating violence against
children, their abuse and serious neglect (Georgia);
132.228 Take the necessary measures to implement the recommendations from
the previous universal periodic review cycle in relation to child welfare,
especially those connected to the Barnevernet regarding reunification for
children in custodial care (Slovakia);
132.229 Ensure that the upcoming white paper on social equality and social
mobility among children and young people is compliant with the human rights
of both the parents and the child, taking fully into consideration the relevant
European Court of Human Rights judgments (Malta);
132.230 Strengthen investment in public education, healthcare and social
security and effectively protect the rights of persons with disabilities and older
persons (China);
132.231 Take immediate action to address malnutrition among older persons
in healthcare institutions (Malaysia);
132.232 Implement fully a national strategy for healthy nutrition and
nourishment for older persons in order to address acute malnutrition among
older persons receiving care at home as well as in health and care institutions
(Poland);
132.233 Continue its efforts to prevent acts of violence and abuse against older
persons (Côte d’Ivoire);
132.234 Step up efforts to prevent violence and abuse against older persons,
particularly strengthening the system of reporting and thoroughly investigating
cases (Paraguay);
132.235 Include a dedicated section on the rights of older persons in the
national report in the fifth cycle of the universal periodic review (Slovenia);
132.236 Adopt a human rights-based model of disability in all its regulations
relating to disability assessment, in accordance with the criteria and principles
set out in articles 1 to 3 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (Luxembourg);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 23
132.237 Review and, where appropriate, adjust the rules on the legal capacity
of persons with disabilities to ensure that no person is deprived of their legal
capacity on the basis of a disability (Colombia);
132.238 Recognize the legal capacity of persons with disabilities so that they
can express their consent when appropriate (Mexico);
132.239 Incorporate the international standards in the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities into the Human Rights Act, thereby bringing
to a close the process that began in 2022 (Mexico);
132.240 Continue to strive for equality for persons with disabilities (Oman);
132.241 Continue to take measures to reduce the gaps in services offered by
municipalities to persons with disabilities (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
132.242 Strengthen consultation mechanisms to safeguard the rights of the
Sami Indigenous population, as the economic development pressures in the
Arctic region may impact the rights and traditional ways of life of Sami
communities (Brazil);
132.243 Strengthen the protection of the rights of minorities and Indigenous
Peoples by ensuring the full integration of these communities in decision-making
processes that concern them (Cameroon);
132.244 Establish mandatory education across government on free, prior and
informed consent, and means to involve Indigenous Peoples in all steps of
decision-making affecting their lands, rights, interests, and communities
(Canada);
132.245 Consult and cooperate with the Sami people, through their own
representative institutions, to obtain their free and informed consent prior to the
approval of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources
(Denmark);
132.246 Continue advancing the rights and protection of the Sami, Kvens and
Forest Finns, including through further actions to address past injustices
(Germany);
132.247 Strengthen the implementation of the principle of Indigenous Peoples’
right to free, prior and informed consent in energy production and mining
licensing processes in Sami areas (India);
132.248 Uphold the cultural and social rights of the Sami people by involving
them in renewable energy projects, protecting their lands and preventing human
rights violations (Islamic Republic of Iran);
132.249 Integrate the right of the Sami people to free, prior and informed
consent into legislation (Luxembourg);
132.250 Continue progress towards enhancing the legal framework on Sami
land, fishing and reindeer rights, ensuring in particular that fishing rights are
recognized by law (New Zealand);
132.251 Take effective measures to prevent violations of the rights of the
Indigenous Sami People, to promote reconciliation and to ensure their
meaningful participation in this process (Russian Federation);
132.252 Follow up on the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission with substantive measures to address the impact of the country’s
assimilation policies on its Indigenous Peoples (South Africa);
132.253 Implement recommendations from the Norwegian National Human
Rights Institution to eliminate discrimination against Sami, including relating to
land rights, history, and language (United States of America);
132.254 Strengthen measures to address racial profiling, hate speech and
barriers to employment for people of African descent (Zambia);
A/HRC/58/4
24 GE.24-23221
132.255 Adopt a separate law on national minorities in line with the relevant
Council of Europe Convention and ensure that all police districts prioritize hate
speech and other hate crimes (Czechia);
132.256 Ensure adequate follow-up to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission report with measures to avoid human rights violations of the Sami
people, the Kven people and the Forest Finns and ensure their effective
participation (Czechia);
132.257 Take the necessary measures to ensure that all minorities have access
to work, housing, education and health services (Egypt);
132.258 Review periodically the Action Plan against Antisemitism in
cooperation with the Jewish community and consider further effective measures
to combat harassment of Jews and antisemitism (Romania);
132.259 Step up the development of policies to combat Islamophobia,
antisemitism and discrimination against the Sami people and enhance and
strengthen measures to combat racism (Sierra Leone);
132.260 Commit all government ministries to implement their respective action
plans to counter antisemitism and other forms of ethnic or religious intolerance,
including anti-Muslim hatred, and ensure law enforcement works to prevent,
prosecute, and keep adequate statistics regarding increased threats and violence
toward Jewish and Muslim communities (United States of America);
132.261 Continue targeted, systematic efforts to improve social attitudes
towards and living conditions for LGBTQI+ persons (Finland);
132.262 Ensure that legal gender recognition, the legal framework and legal
procedures include a non-binary or third gender option (Iceland);
132.263 Pay more attention to supporting vulnerable categories of the
population, including migrants (Belarus);
132.264 Strengthen the protection of economic, social and cultural rights,
particularly for vulnerable populations, migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
(Cameroon);
132.265 Continue social protection policies and programmes and combat
poverty for immigrants and refugees (Sudan);
132.266 Strengthen vocational education, language training and other support
services aimed at facilitating the integration of migrants, especially women and
children, into Norwegian society (Philippines);
132.267 Strive to improve the information provided to migrant workers about
employment rights and strengthen the measures to assist workers who are
exploited (Nepal);
132.268 Continue efforts to increase employment rates among immigrant
women and strengthening the role of civil society (State of Palestine);
132.269 Review the Immigration Act to protect the rights of migrant women
and ethnic minorities who are victims of gender-based violence (Mexico);
132.270 Continue its efforts to ensure the right to inclusive education for girls,
minorities, Indigenous Peoples and migrants (Ukraine);
132.271 Strengthen efforts to ensure the right to inclusive and equitable quality
education for all, particularly migrant children and those in vulnerable
situations (Thailand);
132.272 Ensure adequate treatment for prisoners with the greatest needs, such
as women and children (Cuba);
132.273 Improve the conditions of detention in correctional facilities and
temporary holding centres for asylum-seekers (Russian Federation);
A/HRC/58/4
GE.24-23221 25
132.274 Take measures to ensure that drug users receive more appropriate
support from public services and provide them with better prospects for social
reintegration (France);
132.275 Ensure the principle of non-refoulement in the processing of asylum
and refugee applications and reintroduce the criterion of reasonableness in
relation to the application of the internal flight alternative (Colombia);
132.276 Adopt measures to ensure the application of the principle of
non-refoulement of asylum-seekers to countries where they may be at risk
(Egypt);
132.277 Ensure that all asylum-seekers and refugees have effective access to its
territory and to fair and efficient asylum procedures (Timor-Leste);
132.278 Strengthen efforts to protect the rights of unaccompanied
asylum-seeking minors in asylum centres (Germany);
132.279 Ensure efficient asylum procedures, especially for unaccompanied
asylum-seeking children, regardless of their age, with a view to providing the
same level of protection and services to all children (Greece);
132.280 Continue efforts to strengthen the protection of unaccompanied minor
asylum-seekers, including the prevention and effective follow-up of
disappearances from reception centres (Romania);
132.281 Continue to ensure fair and efficient asylum procedures, including by
implementing human rights-based criteria for family reunification (Philippines);
132.282 Step up efforts to ensure fair and efficient asylum procedures,
maintaining humane practices and facilitating family reunification (Republic of
Korea);
132.283 Take further measures to improve the conditions of asylum-seekers
(Iraq);
132.284 Include in domestic law the definition of the term “stateless person”
enshrined in the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and
establish a special procedure for determining statelessness status with
institutional responsibilities (Togo);
132.285 Evaluate legal or regulatory mechanisms for the establishment of a
statelessness determination procedure, in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons (Colombia).
133. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/58/4
26 GE.24-23221
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Norway was headed by Mr. EVEN ERIKSEN, State Secretary,
Ministry of Justice and Public Security and composed of the following members:
• Mr. EVEN ALEKSANDER HAGEN, State Secretary, Ministry of Culture and
Equality;
• Mr. TORMOD CAPPELEN ENDRESEN, Ambassador and Permanent
Representative, Permanent Mission of Norway in Geneva;
• Mr. JAN AUSTAD, Policy Director, Ministry of Justice and Public Security;
• Ms. LINDA K. DRAZDIAK, Policy Director, Ministry of Justice and Public Security;
• Mr. BJERN OLAV MEDGÂRD, Director General, Ministry of Local Government
and Regional Development;
• Ms. MARIA BRIT ESPINOZA, Special Adviser, Ministry of Children and Families;
• Ms. CLAIRE ANETTE HUBERT, Deputy Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• Mr. MARTIN HAUGE TORBERGSEN, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of
Norway in Geneva;
• Mr. HÂVARD HUGÂS, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Norway in
Geneva;
• Ms. INGRID HVIDSTEN, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security;
• Ms. ANNE NODDELAND, Higher Executive Officer, Ministry of Local Government
and Regional Development;
• Ms. KAROLINE HALVORSEN GAMRE, Ministry Adviser, Ministry of Justice and
Public Security;
• Ms. ISELIN HUUSE, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Children and Families;
• Ms. MARLIS EICHHOLZ, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security;
• Ms. TORUNN BERG, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Culture and Equality;
• Ms. ANNE JORUN BOLKEN BALLANGRUD, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Culture
and Equality;
• Mr. WILLIAM WESTERVELD JENSEN, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of
Norway in Geneva;
• Mr. SVENN MARIUS HUSEM WROLDSEN, First Secretary, Permanent Mission
of Norway in Geneva;
• Ms. LIV HERNÆS KVANVIG, Policy Director, NORAD;
• Mr. MOHAMED ABDIRAHMAN Awil, Intern, Permanent Mission of Norway in
Geneva.
