GE.22-00119(E)
Human Rights Council
Forty-ninth session
28 February–1 April 2022
Agenda item 6
Universal periodic review
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic
Review*
Samoa
* The annex is being circulated without formal editing, in the language of submission only.
United Nations A/HRC/49/7
General Assembly Distr.: General
6 January 2022
Original: English
A/HRC/49/7
2
Introduction
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with
Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its thirty-ninth session from 1 to 12 November
2021. The review of Samoa was held at the 3rd meeting, on 2 November 2021. The delegation
of Samoa was headed by the Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Fiame Naomi Mata’afa. At its 12th meeting, held on 9 November 2021, the Working Group
adopted the report on Samoa.
2. On 12 January 2021, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of
rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Samoa: Brazil, Denmark and Uzbekistan.
3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution
5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were
issued for the review of Samoa:
(a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with
paragraph 15 (a);1
(b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b);2
(c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c).
3
4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Canada, Germany, Liechtenstein, Panama,
Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to
Samoa through the troika. These questions are available on the website of the universal
periodic review.
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process
A. Presentation by the State under review
5. The Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade introduced the national
report of Samoa to the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review.
6. The delegation recalled that Samoa was a small island developing State and that the
Government’s aspiration was to ensure that all Samoans lived good quality lives, that the
country’s culture was protected, its Christian values respected, the natural environment
secured from further deterioration and individual rights upheld. That was underpinned by the
State’s unique communal fa’a Samoa (Samoan way of life, culture and traditions), according
to which the people took collective responsibility for each other, for their aiga (extended
family), their villages and their country.
7. The Samoan culture, Christian values and the rule of law were vital to Samoans’
efforts to promote and fulfil all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country.
8. The Constitution remained the supreme law of the land and set out the fundamental
rights and freedoms recognized by Samoa. The State was blessed with a generally peaceful
and safe society with an active media community. Parliamentary elections were considered
open and fair. Order and security were supported by the matai (chief) and traditional village
systems that worked closely with an unarmed police force. Samoa continued to pursue a
human rights-based approach to sustainable development.
9. The development and resolve of Samoa as a nation continued to be tested. Climate
change posed a persistent existential threat. The measles epidemic in 2019 had claimed many
young lives and had been devastating for Samoa. The border closures imposed in an effort to
1 A/HRC/WG.6/39/WSM/1.
2 A/HRC/WG.6/39/WSM/2.
3 A/HRC/WG.6/39/WSM/3.
A/HRC/49/7
3
limit the circulation of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) had reversed hard-fought
development gains. Nevertheless, the country remained COVID free.
10. More recently, the events that had occurred following the 2021 elections had divided
the country and tested all key pillars of society. While that period had been difficult for
Samoa, it had been a key milestone in the country’s ongoing journey as a mature democracy.
The rule of law had been upheld as a result of the State’s democratic traditions and its
independent judiciary. That had allowed for a peaceful transition to the new Government, led
by Fiame Naomi Mata’afa, the country’s first female Prime Minister.
11. Since its first and second universal periodic reviews in 2011 and 2016, Samoa had
continued to invest in improving its implementation of the recommendations. It had
established the National Mechanism for the Implementation, Reporting and Follow-up
Taskforce, ensuring coordinated and continuous implementation of those recommendations.
It had improved data collection and alignment with other reporting processes.
12. The Government’s strengthened engagement with stakeholders had garnered positive
feedback. The dedicated interactive dialogues that had taken place and the follow-up
responses from the Government, in particular given the centrality of a rights-based approach
on issues raised by the United Nations, the Office of the Ombudsman (the national human
rights institution) and non-governmental stakeholders, had been a successful feature of the
current review.
13. The national report focused on the implementation of the 129 recommendations
received in 2016. A matrix identifying key actions had been developed and shared. More than
90 per cent of the recommendations from the previous cycle had been either fully or partially
implemented and action on implementation had been integrated into national action on the
Sustainable Development Goals and national development plans. Moreover, some of the
more difficult issues that had been raised in the recommendations that had been noted had
already been discussed.
14. The human rights framework of Samoa had been progressively strengthened through
changes in legislation, improved institutions and policies, as well as dedicated awareness-
raising and training. Samoa had ratified six of the nine core human rights instruments and
remained committed to ratifying the remaining three. Furthermore, Samoa maintained a
standing invitation to all the special procedure mandate holders; it was currently awaiting the
visit of one mandate holder, when the borders reopened. A plan to submit overdue reports to
the treaty bodies was also in place.
15. Nonetheless, more remained to be achieved and there were no easy solutions to some
of the ongoing challenges, including on domestic and gender-based violence, climate change
and recovery from the health crises.
16. Progress had been made in terms of education, which was compulsory and free of
charge in public schools, with universal access to primary education. In addition, the number
of children with disabilities who were enrolled in schools had increased. Access to clean
water, sanitation, roads and electricity was almost universal and there was no extreme hunger
in the country. People had better access to public health services and facilities and the number
of women who died in childbirth had decreased. Villages were introducing by-laws to punish
perpetrators of violence. There were now more women than men in top management in the
public sector. Building resilience to disasters and climate change was fully integrated across
all sectors and at the community level and the infrastructure was more climate resilient and
inclusive. For Samoa, building resilience to climate change was a matter of survival.
17. The new Government had recently passed its first budget focusing on recovery,
building resilience and shared prosperity for all the people of Samoa. The level of investment
in social protection had increased and funds had been committed to enforcing the Community
Law Centre Act.
18. Strengthening health services was a main priority. About 70 per cent of the eligible
population had been fully vaccinated against COVID-19. The vaccination roll-out for
children aged between 12 and 17 years old had begun.
A/HRC/49/7
4
19. Empowering communities and stimulating business innovation and growth were key
to the country’s post COVID-19 recovery. Increasing the use of technology could support
the economic empowerment of women, young people and persons with disabilities.
20. Fa’afafine and fa’afatama were unique to Samoan society. The Samoa Fa’afafine
Association continued to work closely with the Government in key sectors such as health and
businesses, and the engagement had been strengthened as the Association had become an
important dialogue partner in the universal periodic review process. In sharing their priorities
with the Government, fa’afafine and fa’afatama persons had called for an in-depth
understanding by the Human Rights Council of specific indigenous identities like fa’afafine
and fa’afatama, but not just through the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning and
intersex lenses.
21. While there had been much progress, not all Samoans had benefited from it equally
and many challenges remained. The universal periodic review was a platform that the
Government had used to assess progress and identify gaps requiring attention. Therefore, the
new and emerging issues identified in the national report would be key for the forthcoming
four to five years.
22. The Government would continue to ensure strong and decisive leadership and to
strengthen a whole-of-society approach. Samoa was committed to ensuring that the mounting
challenges were faced, while still promoting the respect, protection and fulfilment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms in Samoa.
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review
23. During the interactive dialogue, 54 delegations made statements. Recommendations
made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.
24. Montenegro encouraged Samoa to seek technical support from the OHCHR regional
office for the Pacific in submitting its overdue reports to treaty bodies. Montenegro
commended the enactment of policies to address climate change and called on Samoa to
integrate a rights-based approach in those policies. Montenegro acknowledged the
Government’s commitment to further develop policies and ensure a whole-of-society
approach to addressing violence against women and children.
25. Nepal expressed appreciation for the ratification by Samoa of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Nepal commended the introduction of the
Community Development Sector Plan 2021–2026 and took note of the first National Security
Policy, in which domestic and gender-based violence and health security had been identified
as key national security concerns.
26. The Netherlands welcomed the efforts that had been made in Samoa to advance
human rights and equality within legislative and policy frameworks and encouraged the
Government to further commit to ensuring gender equality at all levels. The Netherlands
expressed concern about the prohibition of consensual same-sex relations.
27. New Zealand commended Samoa for becoming a party to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the three Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, as well as on having successfully upheld the rule of law, freedom
of assembly and freedom of expression throughout a complicated post-election period.
28. Pakistan expressed its appreciation for the steps Samoa had taken to strengthen the
Office of the Ombudsman, protect the rights of children, promote gender equality and combat
violence against women and girls. Pakistan encouraged Samoa to continue with efforts to
improve people’s well-being and provide a conducive environment for the enjoyment of
human rights and achieve sustained socioeconomic development.
29. Portugal noted the establishment of the National Mechanism for the Implementation,
Reporting and Follow-up Taskforce by Cabinet decision in 2016. It welcomed the ratification
A/HRC/49/7
5
by Samoa of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
30. The Philippines acknowledged the constructive approach taken by Samoa to the
universal periodic review process, and the progress made since the previous review. It also
acknowledged the measures taken to mainstream a human rights-based approach in
development planning and in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
31. Senegal welcomed the development by Samoa of national policies that constituted the
keystone of its efforts to implement the international human rights instruments to which it
was a party. Senegal also welcomed the establishment of the Community Development
Sector Plan 2021–2026, which promoted family and community safety, particularly in
matters of sexual violence, and ensured the resilience of communities to disasters and climate
change.
32. Spain acknowledged the efforts of Samoa to uphold human rights, in particular its
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2016 and its
accession to the Convention against Torture in 2019 and to the three Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 2016. Spain also noted the progress made in
terms of women’s political and institutional representation.
33. Timor-Leste welcomed the ratification by Samoa of international human rights
instruments and its establishment of a national mechanism for reporting and follow-up on the
implementation of its human rights obligations and the Sustainable Development Goals. As
a fellow small island developing State vulnerable to climate change, Timor-Leste
commended Samoa for its adoption of the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020 and the Samoa
2040 policy document.
34. Tunisia highlighted the role of key domestic institutions in the promotion and
protection of human rights and their cooperation with United Nations human rights
mechanisms. Tunisia welcomed the important national policies Samoa had put in place on
gender equality, the rights of women and girls, domestic violence, persons with disabilities,
child protection, economic development, disaster response and climate change.
35. Turkey highlighted the fact that Samoa had implemented most of the
recommendations it had made during the previous review cycles, including by becoming a
party to three of the main international human rights treaties. Noting that Samoa had recently
completed its parliamentary election process and that the new Government had taken office,
Turkey expressed the hope that the country would pursue its legislative and implementation
efforts to further improve the human rights situation in the country.
36. Ukraine appreciated the progress achieved by Samoa in implementing the
recommendations from the previous review cycle. Ukraine welcomed the fact that Samoa
had become a party to several core international human rights instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, both of which Ukraine
had recommended it ratify during the previous review.
37. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the work of
Samoa on media freedom, including with partner agencies of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Journalists Association of Western Samoa, and
encouraged the Government to consider joining the Media Freedom Coalition. It commended
Samoa on its broader human rights efforts, such as the establishment of the National
Mechanism for the Implementation, Reporting and Follow-up Taskforce and the ratification
of international human rights instruments.
38. The United States of America commended Samoa on its commitment to advance the
protection of human rights.
39. Uruguay welcomed the efforts made by Samoa since the second review cycle, in
particular its ratification or accession to several international human rights instruments, such
as the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
A/HRC/49/7
6
40. In response to questions on the core international human rights instruments, the
delegation of Samoa recalled that it had become a party to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, all three Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Samoa remained
committed to becoming a party to the other core international human rights instruments and
continued to conduct national dialogues to discuss prioritization and the financial and human
resource implications of doing so and of effectively meeting those new international
obligations.
41. Samoa had completed draft versions of all its reports to treaty bodies that were
currently overdue. A plan was in place to finalize all the reports by the first quarter of 2022,
with the support of international organizations.
42. Samoa had recently launched inclusive governance, family safety and gender equality
policies to ensure inclusion, equality and non-discrimination.
43. Inclusiveness and the empowerment of all vulnerable groups was an integral part of
all efforts being made in Samoa to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Those efforts
included taking a human rights-based approach by ensuring extensive engagement with all
stakeholders in the key sectors affected by climate change, paying particular attention to
vulnerable groups. There was currently a Gender in Disaster Risk Management Policy in
place and 94 Community/Village Disaster and Climate Management Response Plans and 41
Community Integrated Management Plans, which were key to building resilience.
44. Samoa highlighted the measures it had taken to strengthen the human rights
framework, including its legislative, policy and institutional initiatives to better respond to
gender-based violence and violence against children. It had also increased the awareness-
raising campaigns and relevant training it conducted. Domestic violence and gender-based
violence remained priority issues; the Government was committed to addressing them by
taking a whole-of-society approach.
45. Samoa had established an Inter-agency Essential Services Guide, which provided
referral pathways for the Government’s partners and for victims of violence. National efforts
to prevent and end all forms of violence were being pursued, including through the allocation
of specific funds in the national budget. Villages had also introduced by-laws to punish
perpetrators of violence.
46. Samoa, as the Chair of the Sexual and Gender-based Violence Working Group of the
Pacific Islands Law Officers’ Network, had adopted initiatives to assist and protect
vulnerable victims and witnesses of sexual and gender-based violence. They had included
the adoption in 2020 of model provisions for amending specific legislation on evidence or
codes of criminal procedure to incorporate special measures for vulnerable witnesses of
sexual and gender-based violence.
47. Given the importance of non-discrimination on the basis of gender, sexual preference
and respect for personal privacy, offences relating to sodomy were not actively enforced with
regard to consensual sexual acts between adults. Since the Samoa Law Reform Commission
consultation on the Crimes Ordinance 1961 had been carried out, some amendments had been
made to ensure that offences were gender neutral. There was also now improved and open
dialogue with relevant stakeholders.
48. The Child Care and Protection Bill was at the final review stage. Samoa remained
committed to prioritizing its passage through the legislature.
49. The death penalty had been abolished in Samoa.
50. The Child Labour Taskforce, led by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labour,
now came under the Samoan National Tripartite Forum to ensure oversight and more regular
meetings between the main implementing agencies that were addressing child labour. Key
activities had been scheduled, including surveys to update data and a national forum to
strategize approaches to address the issue of child street vendors. The task force would be
the focal point for coordinating the various mandates to ensure that the welfare of children
was prioritized.
A/HRC/49/7
7
51. Serbia appreciated the efforts made by the authorities of Samoa to implement the
recommendations made during the previous review cycle. Serbia particularly welcomed the
measures taken to provide adequate standards of living, including for the most vulnerable
sectors of Samoan society.
52. Slovenia noted the adoption of the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020 and the Samoa
2040 policy document. Nevertheless, it was concerned about the particular vulnerability of
small island developing States to climate change. While welcoming measures in the field of
education, Slovenia encouraged Samoa to step up the adoption of an inclusive school
curriculum and school-based programmes in the field of environmental protection.
53. Uzbekistan highlighted the improvements Samoa had made in its legislation
concerning the rights of women and children, and the fact that it had become a party to most
of the core international human rights instruments, including the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, in accordance with the recommendations it had accepted during
the previous review cycle.
54. Vanuatu commended Samoa for achieving 60 per cent of renewable energy for the
country in 2018. As a fellow small island developing State, Vanuatu noted the significance
of that step for the implementation of the long-term Samoa 2040 strategy for a sustainable
environment and economy, thus protecting the rights of its people against the effects of
climate change.
55. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highlighted the progress Samoa had made in
terms of sustainable development and progress on social matters, despite the devastating
effects of climate change and the recent crises caused by the measles epidemic and the
COVID-19 pandemic. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela called on the international
community to provide Samoa with the cooperation and assistance it required to fully honour
its human rights commitments.
56. Algeria welcomed the fact that Samoa had become a party to the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
57. Argentina noted with appreciation the fact that Samoa had become a party to the three
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
58. Armenia welcomed the ratification by Samoa of a number of core international human
rights instruments and its adoption of policies on combating violence against women and
girls, on child protection and on the rights of persons with disabilities. Armenia also
welcomed the fact that the Samoan Office of the Ombudsman had been granted A status by
the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions.
59. Australia welcomed the ratification by Samoa of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the steps it had taken towards safeguarding the rights of persons
with disabilities. Australia also welcomed the efforts of Samoa to implement the
recommendations contained in the national State of Human Rights Report: 2015. It urged
Samoa to uphold the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and to
continue working to reduce gender-based violence.
60. The Bahamas commended Samoa for the establishment of a national mechanism for
implementation, reporting and follow-up. It also welcomed the critical legal reform Samoa
had undertaken, which contributed to compliance with international treaty obligations and
the principles of relevant international law, and the development of a number of national
policies and sectoral plans, including in relation to gender equality, persons with disabilities,
childcare and promoting communities’ resilience to disasters and climate change.
61. Brazil welcomed the fact that Samoa had become a party to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the three Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. It also commended Samoa for guaranteeing a peaceful transition
A/HRC/49/7
8
of power, during which Fiame Naomi Mata’afa had taken office as the country’s first female
Prime Minister.
62. Bulgaria welcomed the fact that Samoa had become a party to numerous international
human rights treaties. Noting that the Office of the Ombudsman of Samoa had been granted
A status, having been found to be in full compliance with the principles relating to the status
of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris
Principles), Bulgaria encouraged the Government to implement the recommendations made
by that Office. It welcomed the involvement of Samoa in the Spotlight Initiative, a joint
endeavour of the European Union and the United Nations to eliminate violence against
women and girls, and the efforts of Samoa to change mindsets about women and their place
in society.
63. Canada commended Samoa for acceding to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and for providing training to enhance
the knowledge and skills of law enforcement officials with regard to international best
practices for the implementation of the Convention.
64. Chile highlighted the National Policy on Gender Equality and the Rights of Women
and Girls and the National Policy on Family Safety, which focused on the elimination of
violence, especially against women and girls. Chile also highlighted the steps Samoa had
taken to harmonize its domestic legislation with international standards on child labour,
through the Family Laws Review Project and the new National Policy on Child Care and
Protection (2020–2030).
65. China appreciated the fact that Samoa attached great importance to strengthening the
education and health-care systems, promoting gender equality, protecting the rights of
vulnerable groups, including women, children and persons with disabilities, formulating and
implementing national employment programmes and combating human trafficking.
66. Cuba recognized the efforts made by Samoa to implement the recommendations it had
accepted during the previous review cycle, despite the great challenges it faced as a small
island developing State and the impact of the health crises. Cuba congratulated Samoa on
increasing its efforts to advance the protection of children, as well as the action it had taken
to counter the regrettable effects of the measles epidemic.
67. Cyprus noted the progress Samoa had achieved since the previous review, including
becoming a party to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the
three Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Cyprus commended
Samoa for its continuous efforts to improve its disaster risk planning and response to address
the impacts of climate change.
68. Denmark commended Samoa for its accession to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and for the inclusion of sexual
and gender-based violence in the 2018 National Security Policy. Nevertheless, Denmark
remained concerned about the continued prevalence of domestic and intimate partner
violence, as well as the continued discrimination and stigmatization faced by persons based
on their sexual orientation and gender identity.
69. The Dominican Republic recognized the efforts Samoa had made and the progress it
had achieved in preparing its report on the impacts of climate change and its commitment to
reducing carbon emissions.
70. Fiji welcomed the 2020 Climate Change Policy, the Community/Village Disaster and
Climate Management Response Plans and the Community Integrated Management Plans. Fiji
commended Samoa for its constructive engagement with the Convention Against Torture
Initiative.
71. The delegation of Samoa reported that the Government had adopted a human rights-
based approach to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals since the
presentation of the country’s first voluntary national report to the high-level political forum
on sustainable development in 2016. Most States, especially small island developing States,
were facing a dual crisis of climate change and COVID-19, which required them to pursue
A/HRC/49/7
9
that approach to sustainable development while ensuring adequate social protection
measures. The draft social protection policy was currently being finalized. The extended
family (aiga) and the village system remained important aspects of social protection in
Samoa. However, the limited fiscal space in a small island developing State like Samoa made
that approach challenging, notably with regard to the provision of comprehensive basic and
essential services and social protection coverage. The new Government had passed its first
budget, which focused on recovery, building resilience and shared prosperity for all the
people of Samoa. It had increased investment in social protection.
72. Samoa stated that its authorities had identified mental health as a priority, as had been
noted in its national report, and mental health was addressed in the Samoa Health Sector Plan
2020–2030. It was also a priority with regard to efforts to implement the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Linking such efforts to the sectoral plans was vital to
ensure adequate resources for implementation. The lessons learned after the measles
epidemic in 2019 had guided the implementation of the COVID-19 response of Samoa and
were proving crucial to improving health care.
73. The national policy for persons with disabilities (2021–2031) had been launched and
the development of a specific law on that issue was currently under discussion.
74. Proposed amendments to the Crimes Act would increase penalties and terms of
imprisonment for perpetrators of transnational organized crime and crimes relating to migrant
smuggling, people trafficking and sexual exploitation. The consideration of those proposals
would provide an opportunity to further consider and develop policy changes to recognize
domestic trafficking in persons. The multi-agency Transnational Crimes Unit, the National
Security Policy and the Guidelines for the Management of the Transnational Crimes of
Trafficking and Smuggling had contributed significantly to advancing the counter-trafficking
agenda in Samoa.
75. Finland appreciated the engagement of Samoa in the universal periodic review
process.
76. France welcomed the fact that Samoa had become a party to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the three
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
77. Georgia noted with satisfaction the fact that Samoa had become a party to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It also welcomed
the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020 and the Samoa 2040 policy documents, which were
aligned with international commitments relating to climate change. In that regard, Georgia
noted the need to adopt a human rights-based approach.
78. Germany commended the Government of Samoa for the ratification of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the accession to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the three Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Germany remained concerned about
the prevalence of domestic violence perpetrated against women and girls and the pandemic-
related increase in child labour.
79. Iceland welcomed the delegation of Samoa and its national report.
80. India noted the inherent vulnerabilities of Samoa to the impacts of climate change and
appreciated its efforts to integrate the Sustainable Development Goals into the Strategy for
the Development of Samoa. India commended the Government for the measures it had taken
to improve the quality of life for all and to incorporate the needs of the most vulnerable across
the four priority pillars and 14 sectoral plans. It also commended it on the ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
81. Indonesia welcomed the six national policies and the Community Development Sector
Plan and encouraged their full implementation to support the realization of the obligations of
Samoa under international human rights law. Indonesia commended Samoa on having
become a party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the
A/HRC/49/7
10
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment since the second review cycle.
82. Iraq congratulated Samoa for its efforts to develop human rights legislation and bring
national laws into line with the international commitments Samoa had made during the
second review cycle. Iraq commended Samoa for its accession to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
83. Ireland expressed support for the efforts of Samoa to promote women’s participation
in public and political life, including through mandatory minimum quotas, and welcomed the
increase in the number of women in senior roles. Nevertheless, Ireland remained concerned
about the levels of domestic and gender-based violence against women and girls, and about
violence against children, particularly the provision in law for the use of so-called reasonable
force in schools.
84. Italy commended Samoa on its accession to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its ratification of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as Italy had recommended in the second review
cycle. Italy also welcomed the launch of national policies aimed at promoting and protecting
the rights of women and girls, as well as the rights of the child.
85. Japan appreciated the positive steps Samoa had taken since the previous review cycle,
notably the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2016
and the accession to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment in 2019. Japan welcomed the progress made in the area of gender
equality, such as the introduction of a minimum quota for the representation of women in the
parliament.
86. Luxembourg congratulated Samoa for its accession to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 2019 and to the three
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 2016.
87. Malawi noted that climate change affected small islands and least developed countries
disproportionately, compared to their minimal contribution to harmful emissions. In that
regard, Malawi applauded Samoa for adopting the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020 to
mitigate the impact of climate change, and the Samoa 2040 strategy to guide sustainable
national development.
88. Malaysia was pleased to note that Samoa had established a web application called
SADATA to track the implementation of its human rights obligations. Malaysia was
encouraged by several key developments in the implementation of recommendations on
measures to tackle discrimination against women, to eliminate violence against children and
to promote the rights of persons with disabilities that had been made during the second review
cycle. Malaysia appreciated the strong commitment of Samoa to tackle climate change.
89. Maldives commended Samoa for expanding the definition of security in its 2018
National Security Policy to cover not only border security and transnational crimes, but also
climate change and human security. Maldives saw that approach as a positive step forward
in mainstreaming climate resilience across all development sectors.
90. The Marshall Islands congratulated Samoa on its ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2016 and its accession to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 2019. The
Marshall Islands welcomed the efforts of Samoa to mitigate the impacts of climate change
through the adoption of the Samoa Climate Change Policy 2020 and was encouraged by its
commitment to reaching 100 per cent of renewable energy by 2025.
91. Mauritius noted that, despite challenges such as natural disasters and the COVID-19
pandemic, Samoa had achieved progress, especially in providing universal access to primary
education and amending legislation to enable compulsory education up to the age of 16.
Mauritius commended Samoa for the establishment of the Sustainable Development Goals
task force to coordinate the implementation of, follow-up to and reporting on those Goals.
92. Mexico welcomed the implementation of the National Policy on Gender Equality and
the Rights of Women and Girls 2021–2031, the SADATA application to help track
A/HRC/49/7
11
implementation of human rights recommendations, and the ratification by Samoa in 2016 of
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
93. The delegation of Samoa addressed additional questions and observations raised
during the interactive dialogue.
94. Pursuant to section 116 of the Crimes Act, procuring an abortion or miscarriage was
unlawful unless the woman or girl had been pregnant for less than 20 weeks and the person
performing the abortion was a registered medical practitioner who believed that continuing
the pregnancy would result in serious danger to the life or physical or mental health of the
woman or girl. That provisions did therefore recognize risks to the life of the pregnant woman
or girl. Given the sensitivities involved in the Christian values of Samoa, the current laws
were considered sufficient to address the physical and mental health risks that might be faced
by victims of sexual offences.
95. The minimum legal age of marriage was now 18 for both men and women and consent
was required for any man or woman under the age of 21 wishing to marry. Section 72 of the
Immigration Act 2020 included amendments to the Marriage Ordinance 1961, notably to
section 9 regarding the minimum age of marriage and section 10 regarding consent to the
marriage of minors.
96. In Samoa, the judiciary was recognized as independent under the Constitution. A
judge had guaranteed tenure until the mandatory retirement age of 68 years. A Chief Justice
could not be removed from office except by the Head of State with the approval of not less
than two thirds of the Legislative Assembly, on the grounds prescribed under article 67 of
the Constitution. Separate legislation was being considered to provide the Judicial Service
Commission with guidelines to assist in advising the Head of State. The best test of the
independence of the judiciary had been the fact that the rule of law had been upheld through
the democratic traditions and independent judiciary of Samoa, which had allowed for a
peaceful transition of power to the new Government.
97. On the question of the adoption of legislative changes to address discrimination on
the grounds of sexuality or disability, the delegation of Samoa noted that article 15 of the
Constitution had been interpreted by the Supreme Court as having the same intent as that of
article 14 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
(the European Convention on Human Rights). That article provided that the enjoyment of the
rights provided for in the Convention should be secured without discrimination on any
ground.
98. The limited human and financial resources and capacities available to the Office of
the Ombudsman (the national human rights institution) was an ongoing concern for a small
island developing State like Samoa. The Government continued to assess other means of
providing the institution with support through partnerships and other forms of collaboration.
Nevertheless, those constraints had not hampered the successful delivery of the institution’s
mandate.
99. Women in rural areas had access to health care, including in district hospitals, in which
staff numbers had increased. The delegation noted that Samoa had provided information in
the national report regarding sexual reproductive health, including with regard to sexually
transmitted diseases and sexually transmitted infections, and the right to education. Relevant
civil society organizations and government partners were working to ensure that the family
life education curriculum was in line with international technical guidance on sexuality
education.
100. The question of developing a national action plan on business and human rights would
be considered in due course, based on relevance and national dialogues on the issue.
101. The Prime Minister thanked all the Member States for their constructive feedback,
and the members of the troika and the secretariat for their assistance, as well as the countries
that had sent questions in advance.
102. Samoa acknowledged the technical and financial assistance provided by the
international community to implement its human rights commitments.
A/HRC/49/7
12
103. Samoa highlighted the fact that its approach to human rights was not static; it was
informed by continuing debate at the domestic and international levels.
104. Sharing its reflections on the universal periodic review process, Samoa recommended
improving the format in order to allow for proper contextualization of the issues. Virtual
presentations enabled more people to be involved in the process and strengthened ownership.
105. The delegation noted the benefits and contributions of the universal periodic review
to the country’s ongoing development and growth as a nation and indicated that the
recommendations would form a part of its human rights road map for the next four to five
years. There were no simple solutions to some of the issues raised. Nevertheless, a whole-of-
society approach with a whole-of-government response could make all the difference.
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations
106. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below
have been examined by Samoa and enjoy the support of Samoa:
106.1 Continue to implement effective measures to further promote and
protect human rights in the country, including by acceding to international
conventions and covenants in this area (Uzbekistan);
106.2 Advance steps towards the ratification of core human rights treaties
(Georgia);
106.3 Accede to further international human rights treaties (Turkey);
106.4 Consider the ratification of international instruments to which the
country is not yet party, in particular, the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty
(Argentina);
106.5 Persevere in the commitment to ratify the international human rights
instruments to which Samoa is not yet party, namely the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Brazil);
106.6 Join further core human rights treaties to ensure more effective
protection of human rights, including the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Germany);
106.7 Increase efforts to swiftly ratify the main international human rights
instruments, especially the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (Italy);
106.8 Take the necessary measures to ratify the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families and enhance national capacities for the ratification,
including through technical assistance cooperation with international partners
(Indonesia);
106.9 Accede to the remaining core human rights treaties, including the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and incorporate them into domestic law (Ukraine);
A/HRC/49/7
13
106.10 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Nepal);
106.11 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination (India);
106.12 Ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination (Armenia) (Malawi) (Finland) (France) (Luxembourg);
106.13 Consider ratifying the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and introducing its provisions into the national legislation
(Bulgaria);
106.14 Consider ratifying the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (Iraq);
106.15 Ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (Finland) (Luxembourg) (Malawi);
106.16 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Luxembourg) (Vanuatu);
106.17 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and proceed with its further
development (Spain);
106.18 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women without delay and develop protocols
to address violence against women (Iceland);
106.19 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (France);
106.20 Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition
of the death penalty (Finland) (Portugal);
106.21 Fully abolish the death penalty by ratifying the Second Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Iceland);
106.22 Strengthen awareness-raising campaigns on the death penalty and
public debates on the subject from a human rights perspective, including in its
parliament, with a view to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of
the death penalty, as soon as possible (Uruguay);
106.23 Submit its overdue reports to the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances (Ukraine);
106.24 Request technical support from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to advance in the ratification of the main
international human rights instruments to which the country is not yet party,
and ensure the incorporation into its national legal system of the obligations
deriving from ratified human rights treaties (Uruguay);
106.25 Continue to harmonize national legislation in accordance with its
international commitments (Algeria);
106.26 Increase efforts to incorporate the principles of core human rights
treaties that are ratified by the country into domestic laws (Maldives);
106.27 Apply comprehensive laws and policies, as well as effective practical
measures to fully implement the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Cyprus);
A/HRC/49/7
14
106.28 Continue to cooperate with OHCHR, in particular in identifying and
developing capacity-building and technical assistance programmes (Algeria);
106.29 Continue to work and interact with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council in order to build national capacities to promote human rights in Samoa
(Iraq);
106.30 Take measures to ensure that the Office of the Ombudsman is
adequately resourced to carry out its functions effectively in accordance with the
Paris Principles (India);
106.31 Continue to pursue the recommendations outlined in the State of
Human Rights Report: 2015, particularly those related to women, children,
persons with disabilities and prisoners (Australia);
106.32 Take the necessary steps to combat discrimination and violence against
women and children, and on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity
(Fiji);
106.33 Continue with efforts to operationalize the national development plan
and make progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
(Pakistan);
106.34 Review its environmental policies, legislation and regulations and
mainstream a human rights-based approach to climate change adaptation,
mitigation and disaster risk reduction (Slovenia);
106.35 Seek international assistance and support in mitigating the adverse
impacts of climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic (Pakistan);
106.36 Ensure that all climate change policies consider the needs of women,
children, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups and that they can
participate in the decisions affecting them (Bulgaria);
106.37 Continue efforts to adapt to and mitigate climate change and ensure
that policies and actions on these matters have a human rights approach (Chile);
106.38 Continue to consolidate national policies and programmes aimed at
meeting Sustainable Development Goal 13 and the 2030 Agenda that allow for
greater and more efficient adaptation of the population to the effects of climate
change (Dominican Republic);
106.39 Ensure the meaningful participation of women, children, persons with
disabilities and local communities in the development and implementation of
climate change and disaster risk reduction frameworks (Fiji);
106.40 Implement human rights-based approaches in its environmental,
climate change and disaster risk reduction policies, legislation and regulations
allowing the comprehensive protection and enjoyment of human rights against
the adverse impacts of climate change (Marshall Islands);
106.41 Continue to enhance the involvement of vulnerable groups and
affected stakeholders in climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts
(Philippines);
106.42 Strengthen the environmental and social policy legislation in order to
protect human rights in the context of measures to adapt to climate change and
mitigate its challenges (Senegal);
106.43 Ensure that a human rights-based approach is fully incorporated in
the national plans aiming to address natural disasters, including the needs of
vulnerable persons, such as women, children and persons with disabilities
(Cyprus);
A/HRC/49/7
15
106.44 Establish a comprehensive policy of disaster risk reduction to protect
people from extreme events caused by climate change and seek international
assistance to implement a 100 per cent renewable energy goal by 2025 (Vanuatu);
106.45 Guarantee the independence of the judicial system (France);
106.46 Ensure the independence of the judiciary, including by inviting the
Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers (Germany);
106.47 Continue efforts to strengthen human rights training and training
programmes for law enforcement officials (Tunisia);
106.48 Enhance legislative mechanisms and enforcement to prevent, disrupt
and severely punish human trafficking for sexual and labour exploitation
(Malawi);
106.49 Take all necessary measures to guarantee the rights of all workers, in
particular freedom of association and collective agreement, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and
the ILO Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise
Convention, 1948 (No. 87) and the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining
Convention, 1949 (No. 98) (Mexico);
106.50 Maintain the priority given to the development of social protection
systems and access to affordable basic services, with an emphasis on the
protection of vulnerable populations and sectors (Cuba);
106.51 Establish a countrywide State-sponsored social welfare system to
provide social protection guarantees to all persons in the country, including those
working in the informal sector and those living in rural areas (Luxembourg);
106.52 Continue to promote sustainable economic and social development,
and improve people’s living standards so as to provide a solid foundation for
people to enjoy various human rights (China);
106.53 Continue to consolidate its sound human rights policies, especially in
the area of economic, social and cultural rights, with the aim of continuing to
increase the quality of life of its people (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela);
106.54 Continue efforts to ensure the well-being of its population, particularly
women, children and persons with disabilities, especially the implementation of
the Strategy for the Development of Samoa 2021–2025 (Cuba);
106.55 Further develop health services and better protect people’s right to
health (China);
106.56 Implement legislative reforms related to the right to health that
guarantee universal access to health services (Dominican Republic);
106.57 Further improve health care, especially for women in rural areas
(Serbia);
106.58 Take adequate measures to improve access to health care, particularly
for women in rural areas (India);
106.59 Continue efforts to improve access to health care, particularly in rural
areas (Georgia);
106.60 Improve its policy and implementation in ensuring that all citizens, in
particular the elderly, women, children, people with disabilities and persons
living in rural areas, have access to essential health services (Timor-Leste);
106.61 Improve measures to reduce the prevalence of non-communicable
diseases, including through health education, awareness and services
(Indonesia);
A/HRC/49/7
16
106.62 Strengthen gender-sensitive health campaigns focused on the
prevention of infectious diseases and step up efforts to expand access to primary
health-care services (Canada);
106.63 Improve access to health care, including sexual reproductive health
services, particularly for women in rural areas (Malaysia);
106.64 Revise the existing family life education curriculum to align it with the
international technical guidance on sexuality education (Iceland);
106.65 Adopt a comprehensive sexual and reproductive health policy and
comprehensive sexuality education for adolescents covering all aspects of
prevention, including the prevention of sexually transmitted infections and early
pregnancies, and eliminate the age limit for testing for HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections (Luxembourg);
106.66 Strengthen measures to reduce maternal mortality including by
improving antenatal care and providing quality training for health-care workers
(Malaysia);
106.67 Continue to strengthen policies for access to quality and universal
public education (Dominican Republic);
106.68 Dismantle barriers related to the hidden costs of education, in
particular in rural areas, and provide an adequate budget to the education sector
(Bahamas);
106.69 Adopt a coherent strategy to ensure universal access to education,
especially with regard to students with special educational needs (Mauritius);
106.70 Address gender inequality by removing cultural, economic,
institutional or other barriers preventing women from enjoying equal
opportunities (Ukraine);
106.71 Adopt and enforce measures to ensure equal participation,
representation and remuneration of women in political processes at all levels,
from local to national (Netherlands);
106.72 Improve and fully implement policies and programmes to increase
women’s participation in decision-making, public life and employment at all
levels (Indonesia);
106.73 Take steps to further enhance the participation of women in the
political and public spheres (Philippines);
106.74 Implement measures to increase women’s participation in
entrepreneurship (Mauritius);
106.75 Continue efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence
against women and support gender equality (Tunisia);
106.76 Develop comprehensive legislation on gender-based violence against
women (Ukraine);
106.77 Consider taking additional measures to prevent and stop domestic
violence against women and girls, as well as promoting equal opportunities for
women in the workplace (Brazil);
106.78 Continue efforts to end domestic violence and address gender
inequalities by fully implementing all recommendations made at the end of the
2018 public inquiry into family violence in Samoa (Canada);
106.79 Maintain the commitment to end all forms of violence and
discrimination against women and girls, including violent threats, intimidation,
harassment and abuse, both verbal and physical (Chile);
106.80 Adopt measures to eradicate violence against women and girls and
persons in vulnerable situations who have been marginalized, by preventing and
A/HRC/49/7
17
investigating related crimes and applying stricter sentences to perpetrators
(Cyprus);
106.81 Continue towards comprehensive measures to prevent and address
domestic violence (Georgia);
106.82 Prioritize efforts to tackle violence against women and girls (New
Zealand);
106.83 Develop comprehensive legislation against gender-based violence
against women (Luxembourg);
106.84 Develop comprehensive legislation on gender-based violence against
women (Malaysia);
106.85 Effectively implement the Family Safety Act of 2013, especially with
regard to the pressing issue of domestic and sexual violence against women and
girls due to the pandemic (Germany);
106.86 Take action to prevent and respond to gender-based violence against
women and girls by continuing to effectively implement the District Development
Plan from 2017 and the findings from the Ministry of Women, Community and
Social Development awareness programme in January 2021 on gender-based
violence and alcohol abuse (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland);
106.87 Establish a national referral system for victims and survivors of
violence, in line with the Inter-agency Essential Services Guide for Responding
to Gender-Based Violence and for Child Protection (Denmark);
106.88 Raise the population’s awareness of domestic violence, while including
Samoan customs and the role of women as guardians of the community
(Germany);
106.89 Initiate a comprehensive national strategy to work towards the
eradication of domestic and gender-based violence, and ensure adequate
resources are allocated (Ireland);
106.90 Increase funding for quality support services for victims of gender-
based violence (Montenegro);
106.91 Take concrete steps to raise awareness, prevent as well as penalize
gender-based violence, especially to protect women and children (Malawi);
106.92 Enforce measures to increase awareness of gender-based violence,
especially against women and children, and penalize infractions adequately
(Vanuatu);
106.93 Take further measures to protect women and children against all
forms of violence and discrimination (Italy);
106.94 Further strengthen mechanisms to protect women and children from
all forms of violence (Philippines);
106.95 Strengthen the legal and policy frameworks to address the high
incidence of domestic, family and gender-based violence, including by tackling
root causes, providing community support services for victims, and ensuring
perpetrators are brought to justice (Bahamas);
106.96 Develop comprehensive legislation and strengthen community-based
programmes aimed at preventing and tackling domestic violence, child abuse,
sexual exploitation and neglect, and to address gender-based violence (Timor-
Leste);
106.97 Continue conducting community-based programmes aimed at
preventing and tackling domestic violence, child abuse and sexual exploitation
(Nepal);
A/HRC/49/7
18
106.98 Strengthen existing legal frameworks and enforcement of laws
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, including the investigation and
prosecution of perpetrators of sexual exploitation of children (United States of
America);
106.99 Take further actions towards eliminating gender-based violence and
violence against children, including by adequately funding shelter and support
services and actively progressing the passage and implementation of the Child
Care and Protection Bill (Australia);
106.100 Continue efforts to combat the abuse and exploitation of children, and
prevent their exposure to violence and abuse, including sexual assaults (Tunisia);
106.101 Maintain its efforts and take further steps to effectively address
domestic violence, including violence against children (Bulgaria);
106.102 Intensify efforts to fully eradicate corporal punishment against
children in educational settings (Marshall Islands);
106.103 Establish the minimum legal age for marriage as 18 years of age both
for women and men (France);
106.104 Finalize the process of adopting the Child Care and Protection Bill and
allocate sufficient human and financial resources to ensure its effective
implementation (Senegal);
106.105 Continue to strengthen efforts to further promote the rights of
children, including implementation of the Samoa National Child Care and
Protection Policy 2020–2030 (Japan);
106.106 Enforce existing legislation prohibiting child labour and exploitation
(Portugal);
106.107 Take further steps to implement existing legislation to eradicate child
labour and guarantee the right to education of all children (Ireland);
106.108 Continue efforts to promote the rights of persons with disabilities and
their access to public places (Algeria);
106.109 Analyse the possibility of drafting specific laws on disability, using a
human rights-based approach, which guarantee equal rights and the inclusion of
persons with disabilities in all aspects of life (Argentina);
106.110 Take additional measures to improve access to justice for persons with
disabilities through the implementation of accommodation within the justice
process (Marshall Islands);
106.111 Ensure that all persons with disabilities have access to adequate health
care (Turkey);
106.112 Improve the access of persons with disabilities to health services and
support and strengthen the work of health professionals and organizations
dedicated to persons with disabilities (Mexico).
107. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below
have been examined by Samoa and have been noted by Samoa:
107.1 Consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (Chile);
107.2 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark);
107.3 Ratify the Protocol of 2014 to the ILO Forced Labour Convention,
1930 (No.29) before its next review (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland);
A/HRC/49/7
19
107.4 Ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Canada);
107.5 Ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide, as previously recommended (Armenia);
107.6 Strengthen Samoa’s commitment to the principle of non-
discrimination, including through the adoption of legislation aimed at
prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity
(Uruguay);
107.7 Review and strengthen anti-discrimination laws relating to same-sex
relations between consenting adults, sexual orientation and gender (New
Zealand);
107.8 Decriminalize consensual sexual relations between men and
strengthen protections from societal violence and discrimination for lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons (United States of America);
107.9 Decriminalize consensual sexual relations between adults of the same
sex and expand its anti-discrimination legislation to include a prohibition of
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity (Iceland);
107.10 Decriminalize consensual adult same-sex relations (Italy);
107.11 Decriminalize consensual sexual relations between persons of the same
sex and adopt legislation that prohibits discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity (Mexico);
107.12 Decriminalize sexual relations between consenting adults of the same
sex and take concrete measures to combat stigma and discrimination against
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons (Portugal);
107.13 Repeal laws that criminalize consensual same-sex sexual activity for
adults and strengthen anti-discrimination laws to ensure people are not
discriminated against based on their sexual orientation or gender identity
(Germany);
107.14 Repeal all laws criminalizing sexual relations between consenting
adults of the same sex (France);
107.15 Repeal provisions that may be applied to criminalize sexual activity
between consenting adults of the same sex (Canada);
107.16 Evaluate decriminalizing consensual sexual relations between adults of
the same sex and carry out awareness-raising campaigns to combat the stigma
suffered by LGBTQI+ persons (Argentina);
107.17 Repeal laws criminalizing private sexual activities between consenting
adults, including sections 67, 68 and 71 of the Crimes Act, and take steps to
protect lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons from
discrimination (Australia);
107.18 Repeal all provisions in the Crimes Act that criminalize and punish
relations between persons of the same sex and adopt the necessary measures to
combat the stigma suffered by LGBTQI+ persons, which puts their physical and
moral integrity at risk (Spain);
107.19 Decriminalize consensual same-sex sexual conduct by repealing
sections 67, 68 and 71 of the Crimes Act (Netherlands);
107.20 Decriminalize same-sex relations between consenting adults by
repealing sections 67, 68 and 71 of the Crimes Act (Denmark);
107.21 Develop a national action plan in line with the Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights, with the aim of promoting respect for human rights
in the context of business activities (Japan);
A/HRC/49/7
20
107.22 Raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 18 years, in
accordance with accepted international standards (Luxembourg);
107.23 Raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility to 18 years, in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(Maldives);
107.24 Strengthen the legal and policy frameworks to address trafficking in
persons, including by providing legal recognition of domestic trafficking and
lifting age restrictions on protection from sex and labour exploitation
(Bahamas);
107.25 Enact legislation and implement policies that prioritize the health
needs of trans persons, including for the prevention and treatment of HIV and
sexually transmitted infections and gender-affirmative care, and conduct
awareness-raising on sexual orientation and gender identity for service providers
to ensure confidentiality, empathy and respect in health-care settings (Iceland);
107.26 Decriminalize the voluntary interruption of pregnancy in cases of
rape, incest, serious malformation of the fetus and risks to the health or life of
the pregnant woman (Mexico);
107.27 Completely decriminalize abortion and guarantee the right to abortion
(France);
107.28 Increase funding for quality support services for victims of gender-
based violence and establish a community legal-aid centre to improve women’s
access to justice, especially in rural areas, in line with the recommendations of
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Spain);
107.29 Make further efforts to combat violence and exploitation of children,
and raise the age of criminal responsibility of children (Armenia);
107.30 Explicitly prohibit corporal punishment of children in all settings and
circumstances (Ireland);
107.31 Prioritize the adoption of the Child Care and Protection Bill, ensuring
that it explicitly prohibits all forms of corporal punishment in all settings,
without any exception (Montenegro);
107.32 Amend existing laws to prohibit all of the worst forms of child labour
and align with ILO standards on child labour and minimum age for employment
(United States of America);
107.33 Review the Mental Health Act of 2007 to ensure it fully complies with
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and ensure it is
enforced by providing adequate resources and training (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
108. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect
the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not
be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.
A/HRC/49/7
21
Annex
Composition of the delegation
The delegation of Samoa was headed by the Hon. Fiame Naomi Mata’afa, Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and composed of the following members:
• Ms. Peseta Noumea Simi, Delegate and Moderator Chief Executive Officer, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade;
• Ms. Moliei Simi-Vaai, Delegate, Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of Justice and
Courts Administration;
• Ms. Su’a Hellene Wallwork, Delegate, Attorney General, Office of the Attorney
General;
• Ms. Fitiao Susan Faoagali, Delegate, Assistant Chief Executive Officer, Ministry of
Women, Community and Social Development.
The representatives of the National Mechanism for Implementation, Reporting and
Follow-up Taskforce also supported the delegation; and representatives from the United
Nations, the national human rights institution, non-governmental and civil society
organizations joined the Samoan delegation as observers.
